this is the whole problem that everyone
makes anytime we have a problem the
first thing that we do is we try to jump
to a solution if I'm unhappy in life I
need to make more money if I'm
struggling with dating I need to be
sexier it's a concept that I call toxic
Fuel and that will never work because if
I give you a glass of water and then I
piss it and then I add sugar it doesn't
remove the piss because no amount of
building something good will remove
something bad in order to change
Behavior what you need to do is save
treat Dr K is the Harvard trained
psychiatrist and former monks
specializing in modern mental health
blending Neuroscience with real life
wisdom to help millions of people unlock
their true potential there's a
loneliness epidemic social anxiety is
increasing and falling in love seems
harder but we have all the answers the
problem is that everyone is doing the
wrong things now first of all talking
about our problems can absolutely make
things worse because there's a
particular way we have to talk but we're
not taught how to do that the second
thing is that we are struggling to fall
in love and that's actually because
we're exhausting our dopamine through
things like devices yeah people don't
realize and then the in social anxiety
is because everyone is texting so the
parts of our brain that reassure Us in
social situations are starting to rust
so there are core things that we have to
start doing so the first is that Dr K
why don't people achieve their goals now
this is really interesting there are two
kinds of people in life there are people
who like I'm going to advance towards my
goals and then there are the rest of us
who are like you know I'm trying to be
like these people who are productive but
I'm going to do nothing and Trauma is
the big difference here really yeah and
this is what tends to happen so
question if you could sit at a table
with any four guests from the dire of
CEO who would you choose here's a
challenge for the entire D CEO Community
if we hit 10 million subscribers by the
end of 2024 you will get to pick four
guests for your dream conversation and
you can make it weird or you can make it
wonderful and here is the best part
3,000 of you that subscribe will be
invited to join this conversation live
in person and for free subscribe now and
let's make this happen
[Music]
together Dr K if you had to
summarize what you do for
people
professionally how would you summarize
it I help them understand themselves and
now expand for me what that
means yeah so so here's the thing right
so there are two great Traditions that
have taught us
about how humans work one tradition is
spirituality which we've had for a
couple thousand years the other
tradition is science which we've seen an
explosion of especially in the fields of
like neuroscience and Psychiatry over
the last 20 years and so these are the
two places that human beings learn about
themselves so when I work with someone
what I try to do is draw on both of
those traditions and I especially focus
on the area of spirituality that has
scientific
verification and teach people people
like how they work so in the same way
that if we think about like you know
when you buy a car you have like a
manual that is in the glove compartment
that tells you what everything is and
how it works the problem is that in life
like we don't have that manual for
ourselves but we do have these two great
Traditions that can teach us so much
about this stuff and so what I try to do
is basically translate those two
Traditions to an individual the
situation they face the challenges they
face and the goals that they want to
achieve and what experiences and work
are you drawing on to arrive at the
conclusions and the support that you
give people what have you done in your
life what experiences have you had how
many patients have you seen the first
experience that I draw on is my own so I
struggled a lot in high school college
failed out of college was addicted to
video games had no idea what I wanted to
do with my life then I went to India at
the age of 21 to find myself and I found
myself I spent about seven years
studying to become a monk um so that was
very very formative in helping me see
how human beings work but then I was
really like kind of skeptical a lot of a
lot of that stuff so I started doing
Neuroscience research for a couple years
I had a couple of spiritual experiences
and I was super curious like what is
happening in the brain I'm starting to
change as a human being but like that
has to be at a neuroscientific level as
well then I ended up going to medical
school so I I was thinking about how can
I learn the most about human beings so
consider doing like a PhD in
Neuroscience But ultimately went the
medical route because you know the brain
exists within the body um became a a
doctor um became a psychiatrist because
the mind was my favorite organ um
trained at Harvard Medical School where
I was faculty for a few years and then
you know over the last couple of years
have focused a lot on addiction
Psychiatry and also like
performance-based stuff so once we
understand
okay I once had a patient for example
who came in after about 2 and a half
years and was like Dr K I'm still
depressed and then I assessed them right
so when when someone has like a mood
disorder they have like depression which
causes them problems in their
professional life causes them problems
in their personal life and I ask them
are you having problems in your
professional life and they're like no
are you having problems in your personal
life they're like no but I still feel
the same and that's when I told them I
said Mike you're not depressed you're
unhappy and there's a difference and
then he turned to me and he's like well
what do we do about that and I was like
I don't know but let's see if we can
figure it out so really the work that I
do is on that whole Continuum of
pathology where something within you is
broken but then going from negative 100
to zero is what medicine does right a
doctor is not going to help you become
healthy they are going to remove
sickness and then from zero to positive
100 is when we really draw on things
like spiritual traditions because
meditation if you look at like the
teachings of the Buddha the Buddha was
not using mindfulness to treat social
anxiety to disorder he was using
mindfulness to attain Enlightenment to
attain the heights of human Perfection
and so that whole Continuum is where I
work it's so interesting you mentioned
there the case of Mike he came to you
and he had self- diagnosed his situation
and I'm not surprised frankly because of
the world we live in now there's a lot
of people calling a lot of things
depression and anxiety we kind of Ed
that word quite flippantly when we go
through different moods and situations
how do you think the whole Mental Health
and psychology sort of Revolution we've
seen over the last 10 years and the Tik
Tock ification of mental health has led
us
astray so I think um there are some
things that are good about it and some
things that are problematic so I think
the really good thing about it is that
there is a lot more awareness of mental
health so we now realize so what I used
to see about 10 years ago right when I
was seeing patients is like people would
come in and they would not realize that
this is a problem that can be fixed so
people would come into my office and
they'd say I'm a loser other people are
able to get out of bed they're able to
have discipline they're they're
productive they're happy but I'm a loser
I have no willpower I'm pathetic I can't
get out of bed people didn't realize
that that was depression I've worked
with so many people who have adult
diagnosis of ADHD which uh many years
ago you couldn't even be diagnosed as an
adult ADHD had to be something that was
kind of like a pediatric
diagnosis so now I think the the best
thing is that people recognize that okay
there maybe this maybe what is wrong
with me is not like me I'm not
fundamentally broken in some way but
there is some kind of process going on
in my brain in my mind that is
responsible for my problems and if I fix
that then I can be well now on the flip
side what started to happen is no one on
the internet understands the concept of
differential diagnosis so everyone is
like oh I have a Tik Tok that if this if
you sometimes forget your keys you have
ADHD if you are happy in the morning in
satday if you have a kid who throws
temper tantrums they're bipolar so
everyone is taking a symptom and jumping
jumping to a diagnosis whereas like
literally half of what we learn in med
school and what we do as doctors is
everyone thinks it's about treatment
it's about differential diagnosis it's
about understanding that if you lose
your keys there are all kinds of reasons
for that if you have difficulty getting
out of bed maybe it's depression maybe
it's trauma maybe it's ADHD maybe it's
anemia maybe it's obstructive sleep
apnea and so the biggest problem is that
everyone is jumping to a conclusion on
the internet which then causes problems
because that may not be the right
conclusion we spoke last time about men
yeah um and there was a lot of
discussion around just this this world
difference between how men are feeling
in the world and how they're being
understood in the world versus women we
before we started recording you said
your thoughts have developed even
further since we last spoke on that yeah
so I think um there are a couple things
to understand so the first is that if
you're a man who's struggling in the
world
today we as men assume that if we're
struggling we need to fix something on
the outside right so if I am not making
enough money the answer to that is to
get some additional certification or
become more prod productive maybe use
some kind of supplement so that men are
fundamentally different because we are
conditioned and this could be somewhat
biolog iCal but it's certainly societal
to solve our problems externally but the
one overwhelming thing that I've learned
about men is that you know if you're a
man who wants to get better 90% of what
you need to do is not outside of you
it's actually inside of you but this is
not where men look right we we think
like okay I need to get this kind of car
I need to get sexier I need to be able
to bench twice as much so we always look
to things outside of ourselves but in
the majority of the work that I've done
with men really the work that they need
to do is internal but we're not taught
how to do that there's a really great
example of this so if you look at the
top 1% of earners versus the top 10% so
the top 10% of earners on the planet
have a higher IQ than the top 1% the
people who actually make the most money
have a lower IQ than the the cortile
right underneath them and the big
difference there is that people in the
top 1% have a very high EQ so we grossly
underestimate the capacity to control
oneself and if you really want to
achieve the most in life that's what you
really need to focus on and the more
that I work with men I this is basically
what I teach them and the outcomes that
I see are amazing right we're talking
like on on the worst end you know I
worked with a 32-year-old guy who
started using drugs when he was 13 years
old polysubstance use mostly opiates and
heroin uh so at the age of 32 no job um
not living on the street crashing with
his girlfriend
and then within the span of four years
this guy became a therapist himself had
a stable income got married and
published his first dystopian fiction
novel so we're talking about a fouryear
span of like being literally a heroin
addict to you know being a published
author and like having a stable
fulfilling relationship and job and all
of that work is like internal it's about
understanding the way that you work
understanding the way that your brain
works and learning how to control
yourself
is that the same for women though
because I've got women friends who are
same age that are really really
struggling have they're not doing heroin
or drugs or anything like that but
they're the objective sort of situation
of their life is they're so far from all
of their goals no partner feeling lonely
unhealthy and seemingly out of control
yeah so I've worked with plenty of women
for whom that is a problem as well but I
think if we look at on average right so
remember that like within any population
of men and women women there's going to
be more variance between women than
there is between men and women sure so I
absolutely the case for a lot of women I
think the big difference is that a lot
of the tools that we have were sort of
designed with women in mind a great
example of this is like Psychotherapy or
talk therapy so if you look at the gold
standard of how we process our emotions
it's verbally now the studies actually
show that if you look at like estrogen
estrogen has a very very inter in effect
on awareness of your internal emotional
state and the ability to articulate your
internal emotional state so as estrogen
Rises you literally feel emotions more
so this is why men women will have
problems like premenstrual dysphoric
disorder PMS you know when there are
these hormonal fluctuations it's not
that we should treat them poorly or
anything like that but they actually
literally feel emotions in a more
intense way because of the fluctuations
in their estrogen level so I
it's like like that's like scientific
fact it's not like it's not good or bad
right it's just something that's a fact
so the higher your estrogen is the more
emotional awareness you'll have so there
are some biological factors and then
there's also like if you look at the way
that women are conditioned they're
conditioned to be good listeners to
provide emotional support for the the
men around them and so they they use
they're a lot better at verbal fluency
like that's not even related to emotions
you can look at you know boys and girls
who are 8 years old girls will have a
higher level of verbal fluency than boys
do at the age of eight so there are a
lot of things in our mental health
system that rely on being aware of your
emotions being able to articulate your
emotions using words to process your
emotions and so absolutely they can
learn more about themselves I think 99%
of human beings on the planet myself
included can benefit from learning more
about themselves but I think that women
have somewhat of a leg up which is why
women are set 70% of patients who seek
Psychotherapy right even 70% of
therapists are women so there there's
like a very clear gender gap in the
field of mental health so going back up
the river then so the Crux of the issue
is not being able to control oneself
essentially I control is even a step too
far Crux of the issue is not
understanding yourself right good
diagnosis predes good treatment control
comes later okay so first you need to
understand on absolutely and how do I go
about understanding on self and in the
case of the gentleman you mentioned as
the case study there how did he go about
understanding himself as a heroin addict
who had poly substance abuse to this
successful person so I think the best
place to start I know it's going to
sound kind of simple but is to look at
yourself so what a lot of us do is
anytime we have a problem the first
thing that we do is we try to jump to a
solution so if I'm unhappy in life I
need to make more money if I'm
struggling with dating I need to get a
better job or be sexier or whatever so
we tend to jump to Solutions so I think
the first thing that you've got to do is
slow a little bit down and look at
yourself and when you look at yourself
there are a couple of things that I
think a lot of people really miss the
first is what drives a lot of their
behaviors so we focus so much on fixing
a behavior like using heroin for example
right but we don't really ask ourselves
why am I using heroin in the first place
where does the drive for using heroin
come from and that is the key question
right so it's not about how you need to
change it's about why am I the way that
I am and this is where people make such
a simple simple mistake I'd say the
majority of people that I talk to when
they look at themselves they don't
actually they're not critically thinking
what they actually do is they'll make
some kind of conclusion I'm lazy so like
think about what that means like
laziness first of all is like not a
thing there is not like a laziness
circuit in the brain you can't measure
laziness laziness is a lazy way of
looking at laziness if we look at human
behavior motivation discipline things
like follow-through willpower these are
all discrete functions within our brain
and then we just say oh we're lazy but
which one of those things is lacking so
as we understand okay why are we lazy
what does that really mean where is my
motivation coming from what is the
status of my willpower um you know as we
explore these kinds of things that's
when we see really what the answer
answer is and the really cool thing is
if you look at a lot of research on
things like we use this technique called
motivational interviewing where in order
to change Behavior you don't need to
convince anyone of anything you need to
help people understand things and once a
human being understands something
themselves they will automatically
change Behavior right if I touch if I
tell you Hey Stephen don't touch that
that pan it's hot and you touch the pan
and you burn yourself you won't listen
to me but the moment that you touch it
and you get burned suddenly your
behavior will change on its own we learn
through experience but if you look at
the way that most people try to solve
their problems it's not through
experience it's through information oh I
have a problem let me buy a book I have
a problem let me listen to a podcast let
me watch a YouTube video and this is
what we see right there are literally
millions if not tens of millions or
hundreds of people millions of people
out there who are gaining a lot of
information about change but aren't
actually changing
it's wild why is that there's a there's
a quite a complex psychological thing
because there's a certain type of person
who is like a self-development junkie
but they never self-develop yeah they go
to all the conferences they watch all
the videos they've got you know they can
they know all the words but they they
don't actually put anything into action
yeah so there's there's a lot of
subtlety but the craziest thing is that
see anytime we engage in some kind of
self-help kind of thing it actually is a
coping mechanism to deal with some
negativity within us so let's say that I
feel like I'm lazy so then my mind looks
looks at me and says okay I'm lazy I
need to do something about it and then
it's really tricky right because you
have your brain sees two options one is
that I can do something hard or the
others I can do something easy and we
have to understand this the brain has
evolved to be lazy the brain has evolved
laziness is efficiency we want to get
the most yield out of the smallest
investment so then what happens is our
brain is like okay I could like go to
the gym or I could watch a video about
working out and if I watch a video about
working out I will be more efficient
when I go to the gym there are all kinds
of scams that we run in our mind to
actually activate parts of our brain
that make us feel like we're making
progress without actually making
progress that's how you become a
self-develop junkie or self-help junkie
on this point of psychotherapy not being
perfectly designed for men I was
watching a clip before you arrived um
where a lady who's an author of a a book
that's just come out said that talking
about our problems makes them worse and
I was wondering if that's true it can be
so I think this is a big problem is that
talking about our problems can
absolutely make things worse so let's
understand a couple of things so the
first is that there's this assumption
that talking about your problems makes
them better but there are actually very
specific things that need to happen in
order for talk talking about your
problems to make things better the most
important thing is something called an
emotional catharsis so this is where you
have like a breakthrough in therapy so
there's like this moment where there's a
lot of dormant stuff and Freud even
described this where you have this
moment of very very intense emotion that
is relatively new I mean it's kind of
dormant but it's not like venting we'll
get to venting in a second and so there
there's a particular way we have to talk
about problems that triggers emotional
catharsis emotional catharsis create
something like a breakthrough so this is
also like an experience so this is not
just talking about my problems this is
experiencing my problems in a different
way so it's kind of like touching the
hot pan usually it's kind of painful so
when we're doing like work with a trauma
Survivor we don't want to just talk
about the trauma we want
to sort of dig into it a little bit more
and have an emotionally healing
experience um the the real problem is
that sometimes what'll happen is people
will just talk about their problems so
they'll use therapy as essentially like
a venting session and venting if we look
at kind of the Neuroscience of venting
venting is useful for reducing our
negative emotion in the moment but this
is the really tricky thing if we kind of
think about it you know like I I'll ask
you maybe you know this maybe you don't
but why do we have negative emotions
Stephen it's a signal for what it I
would I would guess that it's a depends
on the negative emotion but I guess it's
a signal that is there to help us
connect with
people okay so let's I think it can be
sure loneliness loneliness is a great
example of a signal that's designed to
connect with you what about something
like anger or fear why do we have fear
to warn us against impending danger
absolutely right so if I'm like running
through the jungle and I see a
tiger and I have fear fear gives us
information and what else does it do
gives us physiological energy very
adrenaline absolutely for what purpose
to flee absolutely so this is a big
thing that people don't understand the
primary motivator for change is actually
negative energy a negative emotion so
this is the problem with venting if you
vent and get rid of all of your negative
emotional energy the drive to change
will disappear so if we kind of think
about it what motivates you the most
it's actually negative emotion and you
can literally look at the like the
neuroanatomy of things like the amydala
so the amydala is very close to the
hippocampus which is where learning and
memory happen so we actually learn the
most through negative emotions so if I
if I'm if I've been happily married for
15 years and there's infidelity right
one case of infidelity the negative
emotion from that one case of infidelity
can drastically motivate me so one of
the biggest problems that I see is that
we try to get rid of our negative
emotions and in doing so we actually
hamstring our motivational
capability so I've seen this a lot where
people will come in and they'll go
through like what they think therapy is
which is like actually same same guy
Mike came in and he'd like kind of talk
about his problems and I was like bro I
was like Mike is this helping so I was
still a trainee at the time so he'd been
seeing me for about six eight months and
I was like you come in here and you kind
of talk about your problems but like
you're you don't seem to be getting
better I didn't know how to do therapy
at the time and then he's like isn't
that what I'm supposed to do is come in
and talk about my problems I was like
yeah I think so I was a seconde
Psychiatry resident but I was like is
this helping he's like no and I was like
okay we got to do something else then
coming in and just venting is not
actually Psychotherapy that's not like
so talking about your problems reducing
your negative emotional energy can
actually keep you stuck and if you pay
attention to people in your life you'll
notice that there are some people who
just like [__] all the time right
they're just like constantly complaining
they're constantly venting and they
don't actually do anything to change
their life it's interesting because with
the Advent of social media you now get
reinforced by deficiency promotion I
call it there's kind of these two types
of ways that you can build an audience
or a personal brand one of them is idea
promotion these are my my ideas this is
how I think about something and the
other that's emerged which is really
interesting and a little bit toxic is
like deficiency promotion these are all
the ways that I'm broken these are all
the ways that I'm inadequate and you can
build an entire audience around around
that which resonate with your
inadequacies and then that inadequacy
that you you get held there because
that's the speaking appointments you get
booked to do that's what your books
about your book is about all the ways
you're broken and flawed all the stuff
you've been through and then you it
becomes your your profession and I just
I watch that play out so many times I'm
like I talked to my friends about it I'm
like be careful of deficiency promotion
because you might you might accidentally
build a revenue stream there and then
you're [__] yeah absolutely I I I
think we what we see is that there's a
lot of empathic resonance right so and I
think in some ways that's a good thing
so I I think when when I'm a broken
human being there are a lot of broken
other human beings the problem is when
you're a broken human being you don't
feel like you're a part of society
you're like broken and everyone else is
out there living their lives and being
positive and so it can feel so relieving
to connect with someone else to realize
oh my God I'm not alone right so I think
some of these deficiency promotion and
we see that a lot in like Psychotherapy
groups on trauma and stuff like that
where there's a lot of like trauma
bonding and there's also some weird ego
there with like I'm more broken than you
and my trauma is worse than you a lot of
toxic comparison there's a lot of stuff
that can kind of go arai but I I think
there's absolutely a reason why that's a
way that you can build your brand
because there are a lot of people out
there who feel broken and feel alone and
I'd rather be broken and with someone
yeah than broken and alone it's all
about belonging at the end of the day
yeah all of these things are about you
know feeling like you belong absolutely
what role does dopamine play in all of
this because we we talked at the start
about taking back control but much of
the reason as I learned from Andrew
hubman that it's hard to gain control is
because many of us are in this sort of
dopamine roller coaster in our lives
yeah so I I think uh dopamine plays an
important role but the one thing that I
really come to appreciate is that how
little of a role it plays so everyone is
like hung up on dopamine but dopamine
first of all is a neurotransmitter right
so dopamine is also like deals with
things like Smooth movement so my
ability to go like this is governed by
dopamine you were waving your arm yeah
like so so like anytime you have a
smooth motion so if we look at something
like Parkinson's disease Parkinson's
disease is a deficiency of dopamine so
there there are all kinds of things that
dopamine does I'd say dopamine is like a
letter in the alphabet for the brain we
use it in all kinds of circuits to
create all kinds of behaviors so
dopamine is are absolutely important
we'll talk about it but I think that
there's almost like too much of an
emphasis on dopamine and we oversimplify
the problem when we focus too much on
dopamine I'll give you a really simple
example of that so one is in my clinical
experience it's almost like dopamine and
serotonin have an inverse relationship
so dopamine is what gives us a sense of
pleasure dopamine also gives us
behavioral
reinforcement but dopamine gives us
pleasure but will not give us
contentment so I have I've had plenty of
patients who chase dopamine right and we
know that you know partying a lot lot
using a lot of drugs having high
adrenaline activities that all activate
your dopamine system don't usually leave
people feeling fulfilled and contented
at the end of it I've had plenty of
millionaire Playboys in my practice who
like tried that to find happiness and
maximize the pleasure in their life and
it doesn't work it's never going to work
and the the problem with that is that
our brain has this principle of
tolerance so the more that you activate
your dopam energic system the more
tolerance you'll develop to it this is
why people need higher doses of drugs to
achieve the same goal this is why people
when you first play a video game it's a
lot of fun but hour five six s to eight
it becomes less and less fun and then
you have old Gamers like myself who are
still chasing the beauty in the high of
the games that we used to play when we
were kids so dopamine is almost like a
scam neurotransmitter because it offers
you pleasure temporarily but in an
unsustainable way on the flip side we
have serotonin so serotonin is is
Associated more with like contentment
and peace when we look at things like
mood disorders often times what we're
doing is improving the serotonin level
boosting the serotonin Transmission in
the brain so peace and contentment is
very different from pleasure and these
two things are almost inversely
proportional where and it's really
interesting you can look at something
like orgasm which is a great example of
this
so when you have an orgasm you get a
spurt of dopamine and you feel a ton of
pleasure and then after your orgasm you
actually get a rise in serotonin and you
feel incredibly contented the really
interesting thing is that if your
serotonin levels are high you won't feel
horny so like what'll happen is is we
know this because if we give someone
serotonergic medication if we boost your
serotonin transmission one of the side
effects is anorgasmia and like you can't
have an orgasm and then you also like
aren't as sexually you're not as thirsty
okay so like this is one of the side
effects this is one of the number one
reason why my patient serot serotonergic
medication has to do with the sexual
side effects but if we kind of think
about the neurotransmitters involved
right when we boo serotonin and we also
see this in Monks who are like super
content and peace and they're not very
thirsty right so if we kind of think
about it peace and happiness and
contentment in life comes from serotonin
dopamine is like actually kind of the
opposite and monks aren't like thrill
Chasers right they're they're able to
develop this internal sense of
contentment so dopamine is absolutely a
part of the problem it's a very
important part of problem but I think
that it's like one piece in a in a
larger hole does this explain why people
sex lives typically get worse when
they're comfortable and they're married
absolutely it's amazing how much science
can tell us about the formation of
relationships and falling in love that
we just don't apply so being attracted
falling in love developing a
relationship these can discreetly be
described neuroscientifically so being
attracted actually starts in the
thalamus so the thalamus is our sensory
organ of the brain it's kind of the
sensory Gateway so it interprets a lot
of sensory stimuli so when I first meet
someone I'm like oh they look really
good right it looks really fantastic and
I I feel physically attracted to them
they smell great their laugh is
beautiful so the initial stages of
Attraction are all about sensory
input then what happens now this is
what's really interesting falling in
love is actually very dopam energic so
this is one of the reasons why I think
we're seeing declining birth rates this
is why it's like if you talk to people
nowadays like it's it's hard to fall in
love everyone's dating everyone's going
out on dates and stuff but like falling
in love seems harder and that's actually
because of dopamine so what happens is
if you look at the phase of falling in
love what that involves is a dopam
energic connection and a great example
of this is like if we're going to dinner
right and I put my hand out just Steph
hold my hand and then we're all we're
doing we're gazing into each other's
eyes and we're just holding hands and
then we feel in love and if you kind of
think about people in love like it's
like a dopam energic high because that's
literally what's going on now what you
see if you see if you go out on if you
go to a restaurant you people watch
which I love to do what you'll see is
two people on a date both on their
phones so what's starting to happen is
we are like developing this dopaminergic
tolerance through things like devices
we're actually exhausting our dopamine
which is something that a lot of people
don't understand we run out of dopamine
because we're using these devices and
then we have none left to fall in love
and then there are later things in the
relationship that are more serotonergic
in nature where it's not as much about
pleasure but it's about connection
connection and all kinds of other stuff
so what does that mean if I'm single and
I'm looking to find love so if you're
looking to find love there's this is
where we have to start with diagnosis
before Solutions right so the first
question is do you have trouble falling
in love do you because a lot of people
who are single are like oh like I don't
feel anything right I don't feel a
connection this is something that I've
heard so much from our community so much
from patients anymore I just don't feel
a connection they seem great on paper
but I just don't feel a connection
there's actually Neuroscience behind to
form a connection too um but what what
the first question that I ask people is
okay do you feel like you just can't
feel an emotional connection to people
then what you actually need to do is
reduce your dopamine activation through
things like cell phones uh we see this
also with pornography where we know that
pornography correlates with like
unhappiness and relationships and that's
probably also like a dop and energic
effect as opposed to all the other
things there's a lot of stuff going on
there so play fewer video games be on
your phone less and especially before
you go on a date you want to like give
your dopamine a chance to recharge so go
on a walk for about 1 hour before you go
on a date and then your literally your
brain's capacity to engage in a date and
fall in love and activate those feelings
is going to be higher also I'd avoid as
much dopaminergic activity as you can
before the date before you see that
person and the more that you do that the
easier it will be for you to actually
fall in love am I right in thinking from
what you said there that dopamine is
required for us to initiate sex and want
want to have sex is that what you were
saying yes and no so dopamine is not
actually required to initiate sex it's
that's so fascinating you can like so I
tried to figure this out like where
where how does love work in the brain
it's like every circuit is involved
every neurotransmitter is involved um so
dopamine is what gives us the pleasure
of orgasm but initiating sex also for
men and women is somewhat different so
like you know women will say like oh
foreplay is really important right and
dudes are like we don't need a whole lot
of that and so the question is why so
this is what's really interesting so to
develop an erection you actually need
activation of the parasympathetic
nervous system which is the part of our
nervous system that involves rest and
digest which is why we have morning wood
right so when dudes wake up in the
morning we have an erection why we're
not like horny in the morning well I
don't think so anyway maybe who knows
but like there's a physiology to it
right where when we're relaxed will
develop an erection because the the
development of an erection actually
involves relaxing ation and then the
sexual act involves transition to the
sympathetic nervous system now this is
the fight and flight kind of response so
what we want to do is like we want to be
relaxed first and then we start getting
sweaty our heart rate increases blood
pressure increases and this is the other
thing that a lot of dudes don't
understand because our our nervous
system is a little bit different so when
it comes to women they have the same
thing going on where they need
activation of the parasympathetic
nervous system before they get
activation of the sympathetic nervous
system and then as you activate the
parasympathetic nervous system with
something like a massage or making out
or some something like that some
playfulness relaxation people really
need to feel safe then you can sort of
graduate to the more explicit
sympathetic nervous system sexual act
this has answered so many questions that
I had that I've never sort of vocalized
because I didn't realize the issue but I
have come to learn that I am most
aroused when I'm not stressed in any way
but I don't just mean stressed as in
like stressed I mean if it's Friday
night and I've just come back from work
and I've got home at 9:00 p.m. after a
really really long day and week I am not
aroused typically so what tends to
happen and like we know this in my
relationship and it's the same for same
for my partner is on like Saturday once
I've had time to relax and I've like
chilled down and I've all those kind of
things then I'm then I get aroused um
and there is this I think
misunderstanding between men and women
because we get aroused in different ways
absolutely once again like we we're
seeing so many problems in relation ship
so many problems and dating and and you
know what happens is like women will get
branded as all kinds of she's an ice
queen or whatever she won't put out and
like there's a lot of like toxic
misogyny there and then men will also
get branded as like oh men only want one
thing and they're they're you know so
horny which can somewhat be true but I I
think this is the kind of thing where
once you understand you know how does
the male body work how does the female
body work what of the ways because the
majority of is actually very similar so
like the what separates men and women is
less than what we share mhm um so if you
look at for example like how to create
romantic attraction on a first date like
that's there's a lot of good like
Neuroscience data about things to do and
it's not surprising at all because if
you look at what's the trend in dates
everyone is doing the wrong things now
dates are turning into like interviews
right where it's like I don't know I
don't want I need to know if I'm going
to waste my time or not so we're going
to sit down at a table oh do you want
kids what do you want this how much do
you like to travel how many trips per
year it almost becomes a negotiation and
if you look at the science of how human
beings fall love it's completely
different what is that relationship
between because as you're describing
that dating process I just my head I
thought God that sounds stressful and
then I thought of how expectation
generally creates stress so whether it's
in the bedroom having an expectation
that we're going to [__] tonight because
it's Thursday and it's date night or
having an expectation when you go on a
day the impact that that stress has on
your dopamine and your ability to be
like open and
receptive yeah so it's it's it's so
interesting right so like I know it
sounds kind of weird but let's use your
example if it's Thursday and we're going
to [__] tonight so that can be stressful
or like I don't know if you've been in a
relationship like this it can be awesome
right so like if I haven't seen you all
week and you haven't seen me all week
and it's like Thursday and this is the
time we've set aside and like we're
finally meeting and we both are like
we're going to [__] tonight then it's
great like you know what I mean or not
so much or I don't know yeah right so
like this is the key thing that a lot of
people don't understand so attraction is
not about whether we're going to have
sex tonight or not it's that we you and
I need to be on the same page so there's
a really fascinating study that looked
at first dates on Bridges okay so one
Bridge is a stone bridge one Bridge is a
rickety wooden bridge that's wobbly and
what the study found is that when you
have a date on a stone
bridge it's Le people feel less
attracted to each other than when you're
on a rickety bridge now what's the
difference on the rickety bridge I'm a
little bit scared and you're a little
bit scared so what what really the the
foundation of romantic attraction is
actually empathic resonance when I feel
the same things that you feel when we
both feel it doesn't even have to be
good it can be negative things it can be
good things we just need to both be
feeling the same thing that's what
creates attraction this is also why
people fall in love in rehab like
literally at the rehabs that I've worked
at like we have to like almost have a
rule right we can't technically control
them but we're like hey no [__] in
rehab so this is going to we're going to
have and because people will trauma Bond
right we're sharing all of this deep
emotional stuff you can be honest you
can be authentic and there's someone
else in the group who's also honest and
authentic and you feel connected what is
the nature of that connection it's
shared empathic resonance so one of the
biggest things that I tell people who
are you know struggling to succeed in
dating is like what are the emotions
that you're bringing to the table what
are the emotions they're bringing to the
table and if those emotions are not
aligned how can you do some kind of
experience that creates an emotion so
this is also where like movies aren't
necessarily good or bad the question is
do you guys like the same kind of movies
if yall like the same kind of of movies
and you both laugh a lot that's a great
date you don't need to talk you just
need empathic resonance so whatever you
can do to get empathic resonance will
create a connection my brain went in two
directions then the first question that
popped into my head was about the role
oxytocin's playing and all of that
because I've heard about this chemical
called oxytocin which is there to help
us Bond Etc um and I remember Simon Sy
saying to me that when like cities have
earthquakes it's crazy how much the city
comes together and that's he pointed
oxytocin as much the reason for that
sort of shared struggle thinking about
your rickety Bridge scenario life
sometimes becomes a rickety bridge and
people Bond because of that so should I
be taking my dates to theme parks for
example to terrify the [__] out of them
or what only if you're equally terrified
okay so that's why it's so important
right for you to figure out like what is
something that is going to give us a
shared emotional experience ah okay so
you've got okay we've got to both have
the same emotion absolutely so if I'm
not scared by it and she's terrified
then that's generally speaking not good
now there are other versions of that so
like you can demonstrate caring right so
if I'm terrified and you take care of me
then that can feel good in a different
way but generally speaking like what
gets us like I'm into this person is
that we feel an emotional connection
right that's what I'm like into this
person they're like like what is the
nature is the emotional connection is
shared emotion so oxytocin is another
phase of the relationship so oxytocin
forms emotional bonds so when we feel
like not this and this is what's so
interesting there's different parts of
the brain different
neurotransmitters so oxy oxytocin is
what we get from cuddling what we get
from different kinds of touch something
like a massage can form oxytocin hugging
holding hands all this kind of stuff
triggers oxytocin and oxytocin will form
an emotional bond will alleviate
feelings of loneliness I think one of
the reasons that men are so lonely now
is because we don't feel bonded to each
other so oxytocin is more about forming
emotional
bonds and the other way my brain went
when we talking about that is a question
I've asked a lot of sex therapists I've
spoken to which is should we be
scheduling sex this is such a tangent
from where we started but um based on
what you said Thursday night date night
Etc should we be scheduling sex when I
ask sex experts this they they go in two
different directions one group says yes
one group is so passionately saying no
because it kills that spontaneity they
say um and that you
know right so so I think this is a good
example of like this is exactly what I'm
talking about where we know so much more
about physiology and neuros science now
that the right answer to that question
depends on the science so you can
schedule sex it's just make sure that
you do the things are you killing some
degree of spontaneity potentially um and
but at the same time like so what is it
about the spontaneity like let's let's
tunnel down I think this is exactly what
we need to do what is it that makes
spontaneous sex fun
Stephen oh gosh uh [__] um what makes
spontaneous sex fun it is
exciting novel it is hold on who's
excited by spontaneous sex me so and is
it going to happen if your partner is
not equally excited well I think most
couples would say that they much of the
reason why their sex life is not great
is because it's became become boring and
predictable and syy so this sort of
spontaneity element adds a bit of
surprise and Intrigue and now hold on a
second okay great so this is we're going
to we're going to figure out an answer
When Things become syy so if I watch
like what's your favorite movie Stephen
H The Pursuit of Happiness okay so if I
watch Pursuit of Happiness the first
time how am I going to feel emotionally
oh it was profound the first time I S it
second time you watch it you know
interesting fourth time fifth time so
the more that we get exposed to
something what changes within
us our
emotional the emotions change right so
the first time I do something yeah
emotions are activated when it becomes
habitual emotions no longer become
activated so this is the problem of
non-spontaneous or spontaneous sex is it
it has to do with that emotional empathy
that emotional connection that leads to
attraction so this is exactly what I'm
talking about when we look at problems
in life should couples do this or should
couples not do this let's understand the
mechanisms at play and then if we can
activate those mechanisms in the right
way then it'll work so the the issue
about spontaneity is is like you know if
you feel like having spontaneous sex but
your partner doesn't that's not going to
work because y'all aren't emotionally I
mean they can accommodate you and that
can be fine but generally speaking what
spontan adds is more of that emotional
connection so when I work with um you
know patients who are
exhibitionistic right so like why do
they like exhibitionism what's
exhibitionism having sex in public
places okay so um it's a it's a kind of
fetish right can get you into trouble
that's sometimes how they end up in my
office um but so so what what if you
really look at it like what what it's
about is emotional resonance so if I'm
having sex in a public place that's
going to activate me emotionally in some
way it's going to activate my partner
emotionally in the same way that's why
we do it so it all comes down to
emotional resonance so the second thing
is that if you're going to have
scheduled sex so like spontaneous is
great but if you're going to have
scheduled sex that's still fine too it
doesn't kill the spark you just need to
figure out how to activate it right so
this is where activation of the
parasympathetic nervous system do
something like you know give them a
or even like the sex should come after
some kind of emotional resonance let's
go out and watch a movie together or
let's do something that we both find
emotionally engaging then once you're
emotionally connected the sex will be
it'll be a lot easier I have a friend
who has been trying for a baby uhuh I'm
trying for a baby as well by the way but
this is not about me this is not me like
asking for a friend he lives in America
and he has just had the news that he's
having a baby very very happy and I saw
him recently and I was asking him him
about the process
of you know timing the sex around your
partner's cycle and they had gone for I
think three years trying to have a baby
so it got increasingly more difficult
all of the complicated emotions he was
saying to me he was like honestly bro
like sometimes we were having to have
sex like three or four times a day and I
was like how how do you keep an like
when it becomes a job in that in that
context you're doing it because you need
to try and hit this egg how did you
arouse yourself and he was like no I
couldn't he was like I I really
struggled I'd lose my erection all the
time um um and he literally said to me
yeah he was he was having sex 40 50
times a month to try and he was
basically being ordered to have sex with
her like these are the five days you
better have sex with you know that that
is maybe the extreme case of total
dissipation of emotional resonance as it
relates to sex yeah and the other case
the other end of that poll would be
pursuing someone for the first time I
guess a stranger for the first time and
I guess the job for people in their
relationships is how do you keep that
emotional
resonance so I I think that that's
that's exactly the kind of question and
I think the first thing is that's half
the answer is that a lot of people don't
realize so like when people get bored
sexually in a relationship right so we
have two populations of people some
people will get married and they'll
continue to have healthy sex lives like
well into their 70s like one of the
craziest things that I remember
encountering in med school was like you
know when I meet a 70-year-old I don't
think about sexual health counseling and
it's one of the biggest mistakes we make
as doctors like you know when you have
these retirement communities and stuff
no one's worried about getting pregnant
you can get outbreaks of like syphilis
and gonorrhea that'll tear through the
community like like Co like it's crazy
like we just don't but sexual desire
doesn't necessarily decrease with age I
know it's crazy but we you know so then
the question becomes okay how do you
maintain a healthy sex sexual
relationship over time so at the very
beginning there are things like thalamic
inputs right so what you see
ex arouses you there's some amount of
novelty which is also like new emotions
right so then then the 10th time we
watch the same movie our emotional
connection is less to the movie but then
this is also how couples have sex over
successfully over time is that they do
have emotional connections so they as
you continue to bond with your partner
over the new experiences that your
relationship has so I think having kids
is a great example where like having
kids will destroy your sex drive for
some amount of time they say what two
years or something on on average but
even within that it's amazing because
you'll find these moments where like you
sort of forget right like how good sex
with your partner is and then the stars
align and you have sex and it's actually
like incredibly fantastic it's like oh
we should do that more right like that's
that's like what kind of starts to
happen so over time what we want to do
is really lean into still that shared
emotional connection oh my God I had
such a like I can't believe that our
kids like finally like they the fever's
gone they're relaxing we're going to
sleep and then at like 2: a.m. you're
going to wake up and you're you know
it's going to be great right but like
and so as long as you maintain that Bond
it's totally fine and when we think
about the mechanisms in Neuroscience
that drive our Behavior once we're in a
relationship and even if it's a platonic
relationship um how do
we keep the relationship thriving like
how do we what are the mechanisms I need
to be aware of in the brain in in
Neuroscience that are going to enable my
relationship to be strong and thriving
whether it's platonic or romantic you
know because we talk about loneliness a
lot and there's so many people that are
struggling with loneliness and it's and
you know the reasons that we often
attribute to that are the way we're
living our lives or we're behind screens
or social media but you know you it was
really Illuminating to me that you're
able to point to a mechanism in um
smartphones and social media that is
actually inhibiting us forming
relationships and I wondered if the same
mechanisms might inhibit us keeping the
relationships that we have yeah so I
think there are so many things that are
going on there so one is like how is
technology negatively impacting our
relationships and the second is how do
you maintain a healthy relationship over
time so there's like two different
things that makes sense like what gets
in the way and how do you how do you
keep your tire nice and full of air
versus how do you uh fix it if a nail
punctures it so let's start with like
what technology is doing so this is what
technology is basically doing to our
social connections there there is a whol
scale social skills atrophy and a
deconditioning of certain parts of the
brain when we use technology so the
first thing to understand about the
brain this is beautiful thing about the
human body inanimate objects the more
you use them the worse they get but the
moment that you have biology the human
brain doesn't wear out it rusts so
inactivity of the human brain is
actually what causes problems okay
that's number one so
we can look at studies of like dementia
prevention and what we know is that
encouraging neuroplasticity through
things like learning how to play the
piano at the age of 60 will protect us
from dementia so we need to utilize our
brain to make it the
strongest this is also where you can
look at the physical body right so when
I when I think about what causes muscle
atrophy and what causes muscle growth
the more I use my muscles the more they
grow the more you use your brain the
more it grows so when we look at
connections
if you actually look at human
communication words are maybe I would
say 25 to 50% of communication at most
so you can walk into a room and without
even hearing a single thing that's said
you can know there's tension in the air
something is wrong you can even like I
remember when I was a kid I used to get
bullied a lot right and I would walk
into a room and I immediately knew that
they were making fun of me like all the
conversation would stop and everyone
would look at like one person would look
at me I'd see alarm in their face they
would would all see everyone else would
see the alarm in their face and they'd
look over and they'd see me and everyone
would stop talking I know I'm being made
fun of so body language tone volume this
is really interesting so there are even
video game companies that are starting
to ban people over voice coms so how do
you know if someone is toxically
communicating or not what we used to do
is use like words right so if you say
some kind of racial slur in chat like if
you type it out the game knows to scan
for that and then people will start to
get around that they'll use an at sign
instead of an A so now what they're
doing over voice coms is measuring tone
Oh so depending on the volume of what
you're saying right like that's how
they're actually detecting toxicity
because that's where toxicity exists
it's not oh hey Stephen you're a real
loser I really dislike you it's like
Stephen bro you're such a loser man oh
my God and even if I say that right it's
not negative at all even though I'm
using negative words is another quick
aside so men are really specific for
using the negative expression of a
positive affection so this is something
that's different about men so what we'll
do is we'll actually say negative things
to a friend of ours to express approval
like when someone gets engaged or gets
married it's like oh man like it's the
old ball and chain we're going to lose
you you're whipped but everyone's
smiling everyone's congratulating you
but we just express it in a negative way
yeah so so much of our communication is
tone is body language is volume now
what's happening is everyone is texting
so then the brain does something very
that's designed to do it's like hey
we're not using this thing let's lose it
so if you don't speak a language our
brain forgets it so as you this is what
a lot of people don't realize is that
there's a rise in social anxiety why is
there a rise in social anxiety it's
because the parts of our brain that
reassure Us in social situations are
starting to atrophy so when we don't pay
attention to body language when we don't
pay attention to tone those parts of the
brain shut off and then when I go into a
social situation those parts of the
brain are inactive so they can't
reassure me now what happens is I go to
a party that I was invited to or I go to
dinner with my friends that I was
invited to I'm kind of sitting at the
end of the table no one's really talking
to me and I'm like oh like I really
shouldn't be here these people just
invited me out of politeness they don't
really care about me but if your brain
is functioning well you're able to read
all of this nonverbal communication
that's reassuring so when it comes to
platonic friends and why this is hard we
are atrophying a lot of the social
skills a lot of these brain regions that
allow us to form connections allow us to
feel reassured allow us to feel safe
right now I kind of feel like oh my
friends are inviting me but I'm
bothering them by going like all these
kinds of things we're seeing more and
more of are you hopeful about
Generations that that have been
connected from birth yeah so so I I I
think that even though things are
problematic right we're talking about
how things are negative and social
anxiety is increasing and suicid
suicidality is increasing I'm very
optimistic because I think we have all
the answers like that's what's so cool
like we have a problem but we haven't
been addressing it directly even between
the last time I was here and now we've
learned so much more people are taking
social stuff more seriously the Surgeon
General of the United States released
like this this um uh bulletin on Lon
like the loneliness epidemic right so
even like the medical establishment is
starting to see loneliness as a problem
that we need to Target half of the
problems that we see in the world today
is because we haven't tried to fix them
they kind of crept up on us things like
video game addiction things like
loneliness now we see okay this is a big
problem so let's start devoting
resources to it let's understand what's
going on and we see this a lot like even
on our community like where we start
targeting a problem and people do better
the only reason we're losing the war is
because we haven't been fighting
back why haven't we been fighting back
Technologies must play a pretty
significant role in in this I think we
were slow we we're really good at
creating things without understanding
what they will do to us because the
impact doesn't show its face for a
couple of decades sometimes absolutely
and there's there's a there's an even
more Insidious thing which is right now
the since it's isolation like since
we're seeing more isolation we don't see
the impact because literally these
people are staying home so the majority
of of you know young men for example
like won't ever go to a therapist which
is why we can't help them with their
problems they won't share their problems
with other people because first of all
they don't know how to and secondly they
don't even know what they're feeling so
that they just like feel like they're a
loser so what we've started to see is
that these problems have been going on
for about 10 20 years but they're now
reaching a critical point where like
we're now noticing what's going on but
this has been going on for a while are
people becoming more narcissistic yes
they are yeah absolutely and what impact
is that having I don't even know where
to start like so I I think it's
affecting our relationships it's
affecting our happiness it's affecting
our professional ability I was thinking
is social media making us more
narcissistic is that then driving us to
be more lonely and if so how do we first
Define the word narcissism in this
context yeah so I'm going to lean into
um kind of a more yogic definition so we
have this this word in Sanskrit called
ahamkara and aamar means ego so ahamkara
is your sense of self I am dot dot dot
okay okay so I am tall I'm short I'm
Doctor I'm father I'm winner I'm loser
the first thing to understand about ego
is that it is not a real thing it is an
abstraction so if you were to look at me
and you say I if I say I am a doctor I
know this sounds kind like kind of a
weird question but is that true like
what makes me a doctor I can't biopsy
myself and find Doctor you can't find
doctor anywhere within me doctor is I
have a piece of paper on a wall that's
what makes me a doctor I have a license
to practice medicine that's what makes
me a doctor it's an abstraction so it's
not like a truth it's like a societal
shared delusion that we all agree that
I'm a doctor that's why I'm a doctor
okay and does that make sense yeah of
course okay so this is the ego now what
we also know is that from studies on
narcissism that narcissism has its roots
in insecurity so if you think about
someone who's like egotistical and
confident like Stephen I'm sure you know
both what's the difference between the
two confidence feels more secure and
egotistical feels more insecure
absolutely where does a confident
person's esteem come from inside where
does a egotistical esteem com outside
beautiful so this is what's what social
media is doing social media and
technology is externalizing our
perception so if I think about it like
think about a couple thousand years ago
what was my mind focused on so I would
go out to hunt I'm looking for an animal
I shoot a deer and then I walk three
hours back so for some amount of time my
mind is paying attention to the external
environment maybe I'm talking with the
people that I'm hunting with but what is
there to say like I can't talk to them
for 10 hours a day there's no substance
there's no news right we're like this
tribal community so if you really look
at the history of humanity our
perception has been internally focused
at least at least 50% of the time
literally what we are paying attention
to is our own thoughts our own feelings
the voices the desires the drives that
come within us what technology has done
is wholescale externalize our
perception and this is even where like
you know I used to be like an efficiency
junkie and so when I was in med school I
was going to be like you stepen and I
was going to be super efficient I was
going to be super successful so I was
like listening to a podcast in the
morning about self-help
I was going to listen to lectures on my
way to the subway I was going to read on
the way on the subway I was going to
listen to a lecture on my way to the
classroom pay attention in the classroom
then do some questions like some test
questions whatever so my mind was
constantly outside of me social media
makes this even worse because now we're
doom scrolling we're looking at what
other people are doing so we are
starting to exist outside of
ourselves once we exist outside of
ourselves all of our steem comes from
the outside world cuz that's where we're
spending our time so what's happening is
as we become more externalized we are
becoming insecure because where does
confidence really come from it doesn't
come from inside this is a big mistake a
lot of people uh don't realize which is
if you do really well and you don't
believe in yourself you don't become
secure a lot of people think that
becoming secure is about being
successful that's not the
case if you're really successful you
don't end up with security you end up
with imp imposter syndrome so I went to
tfts for medical school and I did my
residency training at Harvard and what I
saw is that the more successful you
become that increases the rate of
impostor syndrome there's way more
impostor syndrome at Harvard than there
is at the University of Texas there's
way more impostor syndrome at a place
like Goldman Sachs than there is at Bank
of America so lots of success actually
creates this idea that I don't really
know if I can do this everyone else is
so much better than me so we see
actually lots of success leads to
imposter syndrome confidence doesn't
come from success it comes from
surviving
failure it's also far more internal so
it's not something that anyone else
gives you it's like when you believe in
yourself then you're confident and then
the beautiful thing is that once you
believe in yourself then other people
can think whatever they want to about
you the way that you receive criticism
if you if you criticize an egotistical
person they will argue with you and
convince you that you're wrong and call
you stupid whereas if you're confident
someone says hey you're an idiot I can
say Okay help me understand why like I
could be an idiot help me understand
right so this is where what social media
is doing is externalizing our
perceptions building our ego we're so
focused on the Judgment of other people
I see the amount of body like subtle
lowlevel body dysmorphia that I see in
young women is
skyrocketing and I have a buddy who's a
plastic surgeon at Yale and you know
he's just stunned by you you have you
have now young women in their 25 26 27
who are getting plastic surgery like on
a yearly basis like small amounts of
Botox injections or lip fillers or like
whatever men too men too so that's also
what the other great equality thing
we're seeing is body dysmorphia has a
meteoric rise within men this is another
situation where it used to be primarily
a female diagnosis that's evening out
real
quick so social media is making us
focused on our external appearance we
lose our connection to our our elves and
then once we lose our connection to
ourselves we lose the capacity to gain
confidence and how does this then result
in loneliness on a societal level so
many different things so the first
reason it makes us lonely so this is
I've also seen the highest level
of being around people and being lonely
so I see so many people who have jobs
even have girlfriends boyfriends have
friends and they feel so incredibly
lonely
so what happens when
we are externally focused right so if I
if I'm lonely like I need to put myself
out there so what I'm going to do is
transform myself and this is where a lot
of it's so interesting because a lot of
the guidance we give people helps in
some way but actually worsens the
problem so if I'm lonely I'm going to
focus on my social skills I'm going to
get a good haircut I'm going to learn
how to dress I'm going to start working
out I'm going to become professionally
successful and now i' I've become
something that I can be proud of and now
that I've become something that I can be
proud of I'm going to go interact with
other people and look at they're going
to love me because now I'm sexy and I'm
successful and I'm I know how to talk to
people and I'm going to you know talk to
them in this way and I'm going to do eye
contact and I'm going to do all of the
things why are you doing the accent to
connect with you to make you like me
right see now you're now you're laughing
so now I feel okay because now I know oh
Steven's laughing he likes me I'm
likable so what we actually do is we
create a false version of ourselves for
people to love and that's what really
screws us because they don't fall in
love with us they don't like us they
don't like the broken pathetic kid that
I used to be they like this glossy
polished
version and that creates a fundamental
loneliness even though you can be dating
it's so interesting because I I'll work
with influencers like we have a Creator
coaching program and like it's so hard
for influencers to date because who is
falling are you falling in love with the
influencer
are you falling in love with Diary of a
CEO host or are you falling in love with
Steven right is it Dr K or is it Olo so
this is what's really paradoxical is
that we think that forming all of these
connections will help our loneliness
where often times it creates the
opposite effect where now what they love
is a version of me not the real me and
now the problem is they love this
polished version what happens if I show
them the ugly version they won't accept
me I can never show it to them this is
what I noticed in my own life I noticed
that before 25 I was a total failure
with women and before 25 the real
defining characteristic of that chapter
of my life
was all the external stuff like the
Louis Vuitton bag the champagne bottles
in the nightclub they're really trying
really really hard to convince them and
then after 25 I had much more success
with women and that chapter of my life
can be characterized by knowing who I
was and being CAU with it all the stuff
seemed to fall away like all the
external stuff seemed to fall away and
for some reason cuz I I talked to my
friends um who are struggling with
dating at the moment about this just see
if it can help them in any way the
chapter of my life where I was reading
those those um books the like pickup
Artistry books and I was trying really
hard was my most unsuccessful but the
phase after where I
stopped chasing so much um it the only
way I can describe it is there's like a
thousand little micro things in me that
changed whether it's my posture the way
I I don't know what it was but for me
it's that season of insecurity and then
the season of confidence and I'm just
throwing that out there because um it
kind of overlaps with what you were
saying about the influencers and when
you're trying too hard you're actually
struggling the most today and um and if
you see this in your practice now hold
on a second so let's define success so
when you were doing Louis Vuitton bags
and pre25 were you going on
dates I was going to the club every like
two times AEK a week to with like and
ordering as much champagne as I could to
get people to come to my table and like
to impress the girls that were at my
table and stuff did it work well all the
girls that I wanted never wanted me back
so the like
four girls that I really pursued I could
name them but I probably shouldn't um I
could never get them to be in a
relationship with me like they wouldn't
it would I would have like shortterm
success and then they would never there
we go so this is really important right
so this goes back to what we were saying
short-term success is thalamic right so
that's sensory perception
so you could never get into a
relationship so this is like perfect
right so let's understand so champagne
will get you to come to get them to come
to the table oh who's this yeah bring
them back to the apartment right and you
can get somewhere but think about where
you were emotionally and where they were
emotionally you were like oh please
please please right and they're that's
not where they are emotionally so it's
doomed to failure yeah so like I was
just using that CU it's like a prime
prime example of and then what happens
is your conf so you're like meeting them
where they're at you're a little bit
confident hopefully they're a little bit
confident you form a connection and just
doing a little bit of math it sounds
like you've been dating your current
girlfriend for a couple years now it
sounds like it didn't take long from you
being confident to like find someone
that you've been with exactly I've been
with her for almost six years yeah yeah
like like snap it's like so easy once
you do it right you kind of get locked
down real quick right and same thing
happened with me so what a couple of
things so first is like this just goes
back to once again we can take your test
case with the Neuroscience of how to
fall in love and it maps on and like
that's the beauty of science is that
it's true now I even forget uh so you
were talking about security and
insecurity so now you you said something
beautiful which is like a thousand
different microcosm microcosmic things
in here right like microscopic little
tiny little things that you do within
you I say that because when I read the
book on how to pick up women it would
give you these little games these little
tricks you could do and even if I did
those even if I acted there was still
something going on which meant these
women didn't want to be with me like in
a relationship I could I could pull
quote unquote pull them I could get them
on you know short term but I couldn't
get them to to be with me yeah right so
so and I I think that's because human
beings are incredibly empathic so what
you feel on the inside is what other
people resonate with so even if we look
at this podcast why is this podcast so
successful Stephen it's because you are
AU IC it's because you're genuinely
interested in the moment that you become
genuinely interested everyone in the
audience is going to become genuinely
interested so this is what's really
crazy that a lot of people don't
understand everyone is trying to
manipulate other human beings into doing
what you want I want this person to fall
in love with me if you want to be a
leader if you want other people to be
with you the most important thing is
authenticity there are studies about
this that if you look at like how people
in in the workplace rank leadership
authenticity is at the top of the list
so authenticity and the ability to
navigate negative challenges these are
the two most important things to like be
a leader if you look at studies of
psychology so when you're talking about
these thousand microscopic things that
you do that's exactly what I do in my
work right it's helping people it's not
solving the problem outside of you it's
solving the problem in here and once you
know how the instrument Works people
will flock to you this is what Charisma
actually is charisma is like
authenticity and the confidence to face
hard times if you have these two things
when you walk into a room people will
like stop what they're doing and just
like look at you it it changes the way
that you conduct yourself right so we
even know that there's this this
discipline called psychon
neuroimmunology when you believe
something in your mind it affects your
brain when it affects your brain it
affects your whole immune system it
affects your physiology and other people
pick up on
that so you have to solve internally
first like the more internally solved
you are like like yeah it's so [__]
true and I say this as well from a
position of um both leadership but also
being a founder of companies who
appoints leaders and if I think back
over the last 10 years every single
leader that I've appointed as CEO or
something in the sea Suite who has then
struggled was not being themselves
absolutely and I just and it's so three
cases in my brain right now of leaders
who I appointed over the last 10 years
in these companies and three all three
three of them failed and if I can if I
could articulate exactly why they failed
it was because they were trying to be
what they thought a leader was and they
weren't being themselves and people can
see it like the thing I said about the
Thousand little micro Expressions that
you can't control that just show up
invisibly when you are when you feel a
certain way inside that's exactly what
those three leaders that come to mind
didn't understand was I watching them do
the presentation to the team was
thinking God that person's not being
themsel and they're trying to be a
leader and if I know it I bet everyone
else this bloody room can feel it too
and then I've seen the opposite as well
um where leaders have been tremendously
successful and you just know that this
person that I'm experiencing right now
is who they are so that's the Crux of it
right so I think that the challenge
right now is everyone is looking to
become something that they're not as
opposed to really understanding who you
are the good and the bad easier said
than done though isn't it but in the
world we live in well that's just well
that's because we don't know how to do
it I mean until now we don't know how to
do it properly how do how do we do it so
I think there are a couple of core
things that we have to start doing so
the first is that you have to become
less alexithymic so Alexia I don't know
if I don't remember if we've talked
about this before but Alexia is
colorblindness to your internal
emotional state so you have to know what
you are feeling basically at all times
our emotions are a primary source of
motivation so and our emotions will also
like just because we are numb to our
emotions doesn't mean that our Emotions
Don't act so we see this a lot with
technology where technology suppresses
your internal emotional state you don't
know what you're feeling but like this
is crazy like just because you don't
you're not aware of your anxiety doesn't
mean that like it's not like the your
anxiety portion of your brain shuts off
and you'll if you're if you're worried
about this there are a couple of really
interesting signs so one thing that's a
really interesting sign of suppressed
emotion is what happens when nothing
else is going on
so a lot of a lot of us are addicted to
this external world I need to be Doom
scrolling I need to be doing social
media I need to be productive I need to
be listening to a podcast we can't sit
with ourselves so if you when you go to
bed at night can you just fall asleep
naturally or what happens a lot is
suppressed emotions start to come out
when we sleep and this is the big
problem is the more technology we use
that we get into this weird situation
where another good place that emotions
come is during dreams so we do a lot of
our emotional processing when we
sleep now the big problem that we're
seeing nowadays this is kind of a random
aside is that normally the human being
processes emotions throughout the day
for about 16 hours and then whatever is
left over at night gets processed while
we sleep we have dreams and things like
that now what's happening is we do zero
emotional processing through the day and
so our brain can't really make any
emotional progress because it has all
this work that's been built stop we've
been suppressing emotions suppressing
emotions suppressing emotions and in my
case when I was like addicted to video
games I had to play until the state of
absolute exhaustion because if I went to
bed all of these thoughts will come up I
saw this hilarious meme about you know
we have during the day we're sitting
upright so all of our anxiety is at the
bottom of our feet and when we lay down
like a liquid it enters our brain so if
you're someone who has like a lot of you
know negative emotion when you go to bed
at night that is a signal that you are
suppressing too much emotion during the
day okay so you're talking about me to
some degree here now I wouldn't ever
categorize the emotion I experienced at
night as negative always sometimes it is
a little bit negative but it's typically
not negative it's just loud so what I
end up doing is I end up watching
YouTube until I fall asleep or watching
some serial killer thing until I fall
asleep and it's and my partner she's the
opposite you know she's a bit of Yogi
like she can
just if she's on the pillow for three
minutes she is
brilliant right she's snoring I'm so
jealous of it yeah and so what you need
to do is so if if you have loud emotion
so what's an example if it's not
negative but it's loud I love the way
you said that by the way it's just it's
me re like thinking about something in
the company or one of the businesses and
going okay this is the solution now I
finally figured out the solution and I
need to write this memo and I need to
blah blah blah blah blah yeah so I think
that this is makes a lot of sense so
whatever is built up throughout the day
whenever your brain gets idle time it
will process so this is also something
that I think a lot of people don't
realize we've stopped harnessing the
power of our subconscious mind so if you
look at Mo we're all like logical right
we're like let's do analysis let's do
this if you really look at the source of
human like Brilliance it's never logical
so logic is something that we use to
feed our subconscious mind and our
unconscious mind data and then our
unconscious mind plays around with it
and then actually creates a motivational
change so when I I work with people who
are addicted to substances or you know I
I worked with someone recently who had a
relationship that wasn't going on very
well right and so what what happens is
we're like I don't know what to do
should I break up should I not break up
you don't know what the answer is and
then what happens is you're like okay
let me break up with them and then you
haven't really worked through it so when
you break up with them now I feel alone
oh maybe they'll take me back I'm going
to text them anyway and then we see this
ping ponging so also if you're ping
ponging in life your unconscious mind is
not functioning the way that it's
supposed to
if you think about a healthy breakup
what happens is you wake up one your day
and you're like enough is enough I'm
done think about that for a second where
does that resolve come from why didn't
you wake up with it the day before or
the week before or the month before I
see this a lot in addiction Psychiatry
too where one day like after 14 years of
alcohol addiction enough is enough and
I'm done and that's what happens with
most people they'll do it cold turkey
like at some random time but what's
going on is there's a lot of unconscious
work that your brain is doing
that then creates resolve and what we're
starting to do is we're not allowing our
brains to do that because we're so
occupied in the external world we don't
experience our emotions and if we don't
process our emotions during the daytime
then at night which is where the mo
majority of learning and memory take
place that's when we have consolidation
of memory but if you're if you've like
you know have a bunch of piled up
emotions your brain can't learn from
your
mistakes so what we really need to do is
be more aware of our emotions during the
day and like do some amount of emotional
processing during the day that'll unlock
or free your brain up to do all of this
other stuff at night
how great question so I think um for
this is where we it gets kind of
technical so the first thing that I
would say for men especially is that we
experience a lot more emotion in our
bodies than is generally Psy
psychiatrically like accepted we're
seeing some changes of this so one
really good example of this about 10
years ago um so I'm kind of interested
in evidence-based complimentary and
alternative medicine so someone that I
met said hey have you ever heard of
tapping and I was like what is this and
it's something called the emotional
Freedom technique and what they told me
is that if someone has trauma you can
tap on them you can become a Tapper and
there's a particular way to do it then
you tap on certain parts of their body
and it releases the trauma so I was like
what BS is this this sounds like
complete BS now over the last decade
there have been several studies on it
there was recently a met analysis that
came out that showed that tapping is
actually pretty effective for like
treating trauma and I was like what the
hell is this this is wild right so even
if we don't understand what the
mechanism is you can study whether
people's trauma gets better or not but I
think this is just one of the many
things that we've learned about emotions
existing within the body this is also a
big problem that I see right now in our
mental health system is the majority of
therapists have no training in the
physical body but if we think about like
you know anger releases adrenaline
affects blood pressure affects heart
rate affects gut peristalsis so a lot of
our emotions are physical so the first
thing that you've got to do if you're a
dude and you don't understand what
you're feeling is like pay attention to
your physical body so do you feel
tension do you feel a tightness in the
chest and we men will actually use very
good emotional language as long as it
relates to being physical so I'll tell
you Steven
man this girl called me and it was like
she kicked me in the nuts now what does
that mean what is that emotionally like
I don't know you don't know but we both
know what we're talking about we know
what it's like oh my God dude I know it
sucks dude it sucks when they kick you
in the nuts oh my god dude it was like a
punch to the gut oh my god dude like you
know when when we have issues of lack of
self-esteem it's like small penises
right I feel like my penis is small it's
like AEM masculate like all of these
negative emotions we use physicality we
use the language of
physicality second thing that you should
do is is use your physical body so
there's there's all kinds of things that
you can do so I I think deep breathing
is a really fantastic thing that you can
do um exercise is really great I mean
there are tons of people that I've
worked with who were like therapy didn't
work for me but after a breakup lift bro
like we hear this advice and we in the
medical community has have been so
arrogant because we've said oh no you
should go to talk therapy like you're
wrong lifting didn't work for you what
you should do is go to talk therapy
that's not the case when when this is
working for people we should pay
attention to it and the more that we
learn about science the more we should
tap into our body so the first thing
that I would say is anytime you're
feeling uncomfortable where is that
physical discomfort there's actually a
really fascinating study that has
mapped uh s each emotion up to 100
emotions to different part like
different schemas in the body so anger
is like in the chest um sadness is like
in the chest and in the stomach uh you
know worry is in the brain and in the
stomach so like you can actually map out
like each emotion to a physical
sensation the cool thing that once you
detect the emotion if you adjust that
physical sensation you will mentally get
better there's a really great example of
this if you clench your right fist you
will feel angry and if you clench your
left fist what do you feel when you
clench your left fist let's
see
um it's like I don't know feel it feels
a bit like a release I don't know yeah
so it's really fascinating so there's
actually studies on this that show that
clenching your right fist activates your
left hemisphere spere and will lead to
anger clenching your sorry clenching
your right fist clenching your left fist
will actually calm you down can
sometimes lead to like sadness but there
even like all kinds of because
everything in the body is reciprocal
everything is like a circuit so you can
activate it in one way like your mind
affects your body and your body affects
your mind even if your your um your
dominant hand is your left hand we don't
know okay so I think these are usually
done on right-handed people there may be
some variance but the key thing still
remains that
um you know there's one technique that
I'll do with patients in my office when
they're about to have a panic attack if
we're doing like some deep deep trauma
stuff and they're getting
physiologically activated I will tell
them to run as fast as they can for 60
seconds so when you run really really
fast for 60 seconds like exercise your
heart out like someone is chasing you
like you're being chased by a monster so
what happens is that when we have a very
very high activation of our sympathetic
nervous system our fight ORF flight
response it automatically kicks in the
parasympathetic nervous system when
we're done so when someone is stuck in
an anxiety state and that's like a
feeding cycle so I feel anxious now my
heart rate is elevated now adrenaline
gets released adrenaline travels to my
brain and makes me feel more anxious I
have more anxious thoughts so this
becomes a cycle how do you break the
cycle you actually activate the
sympathetic nervous system so hard that
the body has to kick in with the
parasympathetic nerves which must be
quite hard because when people are
struggling they typically
have lower motivation right yeah they're
getting to the gyms harder so that's why
so you can do this 60-second run like
literally I used to have an office that
was on Commonwealth Avenue and I would
walk outside with my patients and we
would run as fast as we can or do as
many push-ups as you can interesting so
the really crazy thing is that when we
try to control our emotions by calming
ourselves down like if you tell someone
who's pissed hey calm down what happens
they don't get calm yeah not at all
triggers them right so you need to do
the opposite sometimes you need to lean
into whatever emotion you're feeling
activate your physiology and it'll calm
your emotions
down I haven't read the book but I loved
the title of the book The Body holds the
score and I watched a summary of that
book and one of the things it talks
about in the book is the role of yoga as
one of the things that really helps
people with certain mental health
predicaments and I was wondering if that
sort of overlaps with what you're saying
here I I don't do yoga but a lot of
people that do almost see it as a form
of therapy um and it seems that there's
been lots of research on yoga as a
as a way to help with
our stress our mental health with
depression anxiety and all of these
kinds of things um what's your thoughts
on yoga I think it's great so I was you
know I I was a very serious uh student
of yoga for about seven years um I've
recently reinvigorated my yogic practice
I think uh yoga is absolutely
transformative for
trauma um I think it can achieve Health
outcomes that we're not really fully
aware of and the simple reason for that
is you have to look at the studies on
yoga so usually when we do a scientific
study we have to we we want to be like
very careful from a scientific protocol
standpoint so we're going to take two
groups of people 100 200 people so group
number one is 100 group number two is
100 we're going to teach a 100 people
yoga and then we're going to measure
what happens after 12 weeks the other
100 people are going to do something
like exercise so the key thing that we
have to understand about studies on yoga
is we're taking novices and we're
teaching them yoga there's still novices
at the end of the study and we see some
health benefits there are very few
studies on yogis right there are a lot
of studies on yoga but a yogi is very
different from yoga so when you get when
you become an expert in yoga so I I do
this work myself and you know I teach my
patients this kind of stuff so you learn
a lot about the way that your mind
functions I think there are a lot of
correlations with CBT but uh you know
like yoga will teach us for example
about our ego and so how do you know if
your mind is malfunctioning or not so
you know like you were saying before
when we were talking you mentioned how
do I know if I'm wrong or my partner is
wrong right how do you know if your mind
is functioning properly one of the
biggest problems in the world today is
that your mind comes up with conclusions
how do you know if your conclusion is
right or wrong sometimes it's right
sometimes it's wrong and we just assume
that there's no way of knowing the
difference that's not true so if your
mind is operating in a pure way that's
free from cognitive bias which we also
know scientifically then your mind will
come up with the right conclusions so
the question is how do we remove
cognitive bias from the mind that's what
the discipline of yoga teaches us so two
things to consider if you want to know
whether your mind is thinking clearly or
not first of all what emotions are you
feeling and if you say I'm logical right
now I don't feel any emotion that is
factually incorrect there is no point 24
hour hours a day 365 days of the year
blood is Flowing to your the emotional
circuits of your brain you are never not
feeling any emotion so the first thing
we need to do is understand yoga teaches
us this what is the emotional impact of
our thoughts the second big thing is
what is the ego saying so if your ego is
active your ego will create cognitive
biases I feel insecure so what I'm going
to do is I'm going to do some mental
gymnastics to put someone else down and
Elevate myself now what you're doing is
mental gymnastic you're adding a
cognitive bias to help yourself feel
better so yoga from a physiologic level
will calm down our balance our nervous
system um you know it can do things like
change our respiratory rate about 18
minutes of yogic practice is what it
takes to shut down cortisol production
in our brain so we know that cortisol
will then affect all kinds of things so
Yoga Works on the physiologic level it
absolutely trains us mentally right so
like yoga I think is like the most
robust system of like mental training
that exists in the world so how do your
mind how do you control your desires how
do you control your perceptions um all
that kind of stuff there's a lot of good
trauma healing that can happen in yoga
which has to do with a slightly
different concept so I think yoga is
incredibly useful and Incredibly
powerful trauma healing I am I was
watching something you talk when you
were talking about how people who have
experienced trauma almost operate in
defense in their lives and earlier on we
were saying that you know people have
these stories they've told themselves
I'm lazy I'm this I'm that but when I
heard you talk um so articulately about
how trauma makes us play Life in defense
it made me understand maybe a lot of
people that I know in my life that
aren't overtly motivated and seem to
struggle with uh things like discipline
what have we got to understand about the
nature of trauma and the impact it has
on us as it relates to our ability to
show up and Achieve our goals beautiful
question so this was like one of the
things that when I discovered this it
was transformative for me and
transformative for my
patients so see people who there are two
kinds of people in life there are people
who like have plans and goals and work
towards those goals they're like I'm
going to get up today and I'm going to
like Advance towards my goals I want to
accomplish this in life I'm going to get
better at this and then there are the
rest of us who are like I don't know how
these people do it like I get up today
and I struggle I use a lot of willpower
I try to create habits you know I'm
trying to be like these people who are
were productive but my default state if
you let me do what I want to do I'm
going to do nothing now we we look at
this and we're like how does this work
are these people fundamentally different
so trauma is the big difference here so
let's understand when we're developing
as children if we grow up in a traumatic
environment what will happen is there's
actually something called the loss of
the future Dimension so I'll give you
like an example of this right so let's
say I go to my parents and I say hey I'd
like to have a birthday party can I
invite my friends over and then parents
say
sure next day parents are drunk they get
mad at me they're like no birthday party
so what will happen if you look at
traumatic upbringing is that children
can't plan for the future any kind of
future that any kind of kind of autonomy
that they
express uh an abusive parent will shut
it down like you know this is highly
controlling parents too we see this so
much in like Asian and South Asian
cultures where parents are like you got
to do this and you got to do this no
drugs no dating going to study you're
going to learn piano so we're actually
doing this is like we see so many gifted
kids that stall later in life because in
these upbringings we remove the the
ability for autonomy when a child tries
to express themselves we shut it down
the second thing that happens is trauma
is about surviving today so I was
working with a patient who you know
would be able to tell within the first
60 seconds to 5 minutes when their dad
got home whether they were going to get
beaten today and so what people when
people grow up in traumatic environments
and it doesn't have to be physical abuse
it can be highly controlling it can be
even like children who are parentified
is kind of traumatic where you have a a
a parent who's very chronically ill and
is depending on the kid to take care of
everything that's traumatic too because
then what happens is your brain looks at
your day and there's no point in
planning for tomorrow all of your
brain's resources are about surviving
today how do I not get abused how do I
make sure that my parents don't notice
me
children who grow up in traumatic
environments learn to be invisible and
so then something very important happens
in the brain where it stops planning for
the future because any plan for the
future can change depending on whether
your parent is drunk or not and then if
I was going to have a birthday party I
told all my friends and I got cancelled
now that hurts so much so what what
happens when we get traumatized is we go
into survival mode we go into protective
mode and this is even mirrored like
physiologically where we have two states
of the body we have our catabolic state
where we're breaking things down we're
trying to survive the moment and we have
our anabolic State when when we are
building for the
future so when I encounter a tiger and I
get a burst of cortisol cortisol breaks
down my muscle tissue to provide me with
enough energy to survive we are
sacrificing the future to plan to
survive the present and that happens on
a physiological level it happens on a
mental level so when you grow up in a
traumatic environment where you are
punished for thinking about the future
you can't plan for anything because your
home environment is so chaotic there's
no rules no organization and you're
focused on Survival that becomes baked
in and what happens when these people
grow up is that they are bound by
external stimuli if there is some kind
of pressure from the external
environment then I can act but I cannot
derive internal sense of motivation at
all because now that there's an external
deadline I have to survive that deadline
so they go into this survival mode
instead of this like being able to look
into the future mode and it's it's
really crippling because it's
fundamentally like the part of their
brain that plans for the future has been
disabled permanently no that can be Reed
it's just been disabled in this way
right so like that's your default State
then what we have to do is like undo
that so does that mean that parents who
give their children more autonomy when
they're younger typically are better at
attacking life and parents who stifle
their kids autonomy end up playing in
goal absolutely so so we can look at
something called authoritative ver
versus authoritarian parenting okay so
there are two kinds of parenting that
people can do one is where I'm going to
support my kid but I'm going to give
them autonomy I'm going to give them
structure and guard rails but they can
operate to a certain degree
independently that leads to the best
outcomes versus parents who are highly
controlling parents who are highly
controlling their kids have worse
outcomes in life so even if they're
successful in some
way right and I was even on this track
where like when I was 9 years old like
my dad told me me and my brother he's
like one of y'all is going to be a
lawyer one of y'all is going to be a
doctor like there was no question about
it I had to become a doctor and then my
brother was older he went to law school
so I was like I have to I have to go to
med school and so what what happened is
I struggled a lot with autonomy when I
was in college and failed out and all
that kind of stuff and I work with so
many people like in residency I I was
running this program where I did like
you know Wellness for medical residents
surgical residents emergency room
residents and what I saw is that a lot
of these people have invested a lot of
this time into this dream but they're
not happy so now they're kind of just
like living on autopilot and they don't
like know what to do about it they're
unhappy but now you feel stuck you've
committed to this path so how do we turn
ourselves around if we are one of those
people who find ourselves playing in
goal in life how do we become an
attacker how do we become autonomous and
a selfstarter like you described is
there a a system a way a process yeah so
I I think um so it's complicated but I
think we know there are a couple of
different steps that are involved so the
first is you have to be safe so if
you're in a position of life where you
are constantly stressed out it shuts off
your capacity for neuroplasticity so the
first thing that I recommend to people
is like you know if you're in a toxic
relationship if you're in an abusive
home do whatever you can to create some
pocket of safety in your life because
the growth has to come from there so
it's like super basic stuff second thing
that we have to do is learn how to
regulate our emotions so if we don't
know first of all what we're
feeling then our emotions will act in
ways that are very self-sabotaging so we
have to we have to decompress our
negative emotion because otherwise the
negative emotion will fuel things like
addiction so if I don't if I don't have
a healthy way of processing my emotion
my brain because it's trying to survive
will start drinking alcohol because
that's the only thing that works so we
have to develop some degree of emotional
regulation now this is the really cool
thing so if you look at so Stephen let's
talk about you for a second is that okay
no cheing go so you're are you a
survivalist or you like looking
forward I'm looking
forward how does that work for you how
are you able to look forward like what
what's your inner experience I've always
looked forward I've always had to look
forward I've not really had a choice in
life I don't think I think I was my
parents were so absent that it created
an environment where I didn't have a
choice it's like if you wanted lunch
money it's it's not going to appear out
of anywhere if you want to eat today
it's not going to appear parents aren't
home so you have to go figure stuff out
I had the same external pressures of
trying to fit in at school or all these
pressures that anyone has but I had an
absence of um dictation so I had to
figure it out and run experiments so as
an adult I'm still doing that that now
okay that frightens
me so um so my guess is that if you try
to sit still you start to
panic oh I really struggle with
Stillness okay yeah so you have a
different problem the answer I was did
you find out I was a psychopath or
something what have you figured out no I
mean so you can't be still right so so
so this is trauma like I mean I can't
diagnose you with anything but I want
you this is actually a great example
because your
productivity is is running away from
something does that make sense yeah 100%
right it's crazy like you're not running
towards something you're not building
something I mean you're practically
you're building something you're
building something great and I see this
so much it's a concept that I call toxic
fuel right where're like but you're like
oh my God unless I build something cuz
you're panicked like if I if I don't do
it for myself no one will do it for me
that's [__] sad bro is it yes right
so like like we're talking about having
kids one day like do you want your kid
to be able to count on you or do you
want them to grow up in an environment
where like they can't count on anyone
they have to do if they want lunch money
they have to go out and get it I would
rather them be able to count on me and
our parents you're getting emotional
yeah
why um are you getting
emotional no because I'm so I'm so used
to it I'm so accustomed to it for me for
me there's no when you say it's sad I'm
like really it's just my life it was my
life so do you know what I mean now this
is a great I'm getting emotional because
you're getting emotional what do you
mean so just because you don't feel it
doesn't mean that it isn't activating
okay right so I know you don't this is
normal for me it's sad and you're numb
right so once again you've been exposed
to this so many times but like you think
like that's why like how do I know am I
some psychic where I know that okay if
you try to sit still you're going to
panic like no like I'm getting that from
you does that make sense yeah yeah yeah
yeah yeah some of it's logical but like
like you know you you say I'm looking
forward just the way that you said it
implies for me like what is going on in
your mind there's a desperation to your
forward momentum yes right that's not
good I
know right and but here's the problem is
you love it you love it because if you
didn't have it where would you
be 100% I'm I completely agree with
everything you're saying you're not
answering the question oh you want you
want me to answer the question where
would I be no I want you to think about
why it's hard for you to answer the
question I didn't even hear the question
okay um where would I be that's
interesting in and of itself yeah I
didn't even know it was a question so
where would I be if I didn't have it I
don't I I don't know and I think about
this a lot I think about this all the
time because you sometimes you can like
fantasize about living a completely
different life and I put myself there on
the on the beach or in barley or
something and I'm and I just go like
that I would be so irritated like
irritated not as in like annoyed
irritated as in as you said like not
being able to sit still I would be so
like I'd end up building a Hut or I'd
end up like you
know yes I like when I have that fantasy
of like run away from my life and start
from zero on a beach somewhere I go I'll
just find myself back here again because
I'll do something on the Hut which will
I'll build a sky grave on the hut or
something this is trauma is not really
the right word but it is kind of the
right word so this is what I mean so you
are
controlled by these impulses within you
I would say yes it's crazy right I
always liken it to being driven and
dragged and I go I think I'm dragged a
little bit yeah and I love your phrase
toxic fuel right right so so you're
you're all of your growth and this is
what happens is this is what why men get
so stuck in this cycle because that's
the only way we know how to motivate
ourselves right it is running away from
the panic using the fear and and maybe
this is a bit much but I I I think like
you know I would bet money that there
are there was a time in your life where
you were a no one and you were like [__]
this never again and you were like I'm
going to I'm going to run away like I'm
never going to do this again it was so
incredibly painful and then that's what
fuels you and if you stop I would bet
money that the Panic that you feel is
very is connected to that moment in your
life when you're like never
again who knows yes okay no yeah I mean
I it's it's funny because I think I was
thinking as you said it and I was I was
reflecting on this day when I was
younger and I walked to this park it was
late at night and this kid called Sam he
he started calling me the nword and in
that moment you've got I just I don't
know why I I always think of this moment
but you've got this real disconnection
cuz I'm the only black there anyway this
is like Devon in 1990 whatever um and I
I thought we were so different our
family was so different anyway and just
that moment of feeling totally
disconnected because you're you don't
look like anyone else you don't sound
like anyone else you you're curly hair
you're different color skin and that
just real sense of disconnection and I
think that kind of sort of permeated a
lot of my early upbringing was this
shame this insecurity this disconnection
and then you compound that with your
parents being aware
and so when I was talk about my parents
not being in the house much when I was
like when I was younger I still had this
disconnection and this shame but now I
had this big void of freedom to do
something about it which meant I could
start a business I could sell some stuff
and if I sell some stuff I can buy some
shoes and the shoes are going to make me
fit in because everyone else has those
shoes so it was this kind of spiral and
as you get older I become I can be be
aware of it all I want it doesn't mean
it's going to help necessarily because
there's a difference obviously as you
know from being aware of something and
then being able to take control of the
thing no there isn't this is how we
started the conversation no there's not
a difference oh is there not I thought
was a logical process hold on hold on
great so I'm not can I ask can we go a
little bit 100% so you're so interesting
right so you felt ashamed you felt small
yeah you felt like you didn't have
anyone's respect
right and so you've done something
beautiful when someone looks at you what
do they see now
the opposite yes tell me what do they
what does someone see now when they look
at me probably they
see
um confidence they probably see someone
who's quite secure in themselves
absolutely right so you have a very it's
subtle man we're going to get so subtle
it may not make sense so there's so many
layers of projecting confidence and
you've tapped into an authentic
confidence there's even a subtle thing
because you dress very carefully right
you don't dress in a way that normal
people who are trying to impress people
dress you want to be authentically
impressive does that make sense you're
not going to you're not going to take
any shortcuts to being impressive you're
going to be truly impressive does that
make sense yeah I guess yeah but here's
the subtle thing it's still it's still
there the Panic is still there you know
why because you still give a [__] about
being impressive
mhm right it's authentic impressive Rive
sure enough but it's still important to
be
impressive and as long as that thing is
there like the panic and that that's all
the same thing MH it's 100% true and I I
had an author on my podcast who wrote a
book called status and that's when I had
this like brain wobble in my head
because you know I said I used to wear
Louis Vuitton before I was 25 I thought
that's when I gave up giving a [__]
about like status and impression and
then he was like no if you think about
billionaires they just end up playing a
different status game the logos get
smaller because now Louis Vuitton would
make me look like an like an idiot it
would actually be it would actually
lower your status they just they start
playing games about boats like how big
is my boat but they're still playing the
same game and when he said that I
thought you [__] hell of course I'm
still playing the same old games in
different ways yeah yeah so so I think
you there's a lot of authenticity and
goodness here so this is exactly how
trauma Works where like we build
something that is good here's the key
thing to understand that yoga teaches
us no amount of fixing your life will
make that kid go
away right so like when I work with
people who are I see you smiling so like
when I work with people who've been
traumatized they will build amazing
lives but they still carry that kid with
them and the kid will come out at times
there'll be particular times where if
I'm a little bit like if I like treat
you in the wrong way like you'll notice
that you feel like that kid again when
you're Idol you feel like that kid again
so that psychological those that
neuronal wiring is there
so you can build all this wonderful
stuff and there's authenticity it's not
like you're faking it this is a really
common misconception are you faking no
you're genuinely confident you're
genuinely authentic you can't fake it
and get to where you are and at the same
time the wounds that we experience leave
scars yeah 100% And the real way to heal
is to go back to that moment and like
deal with that kid right you have to
dismantle the world viw that you have
which is how you heal trauma is when we
get traumatized we adapt in order to
come out of this situation I need to
learn this particular thing so some kids
that I've worked with adapt by becoming
invisible I that's what I did I got
bullied a lot so what do I do I learn
how to be
invisible some people adapt by being
successful so if I'm successful it's an
antidote to my shame I don't have to be
ashamed anymore if I'm successful but
that old injury is still there yeah and
this is why it's so complex because what
you've just said is so unbelievably true
but it's where the misconception happens
because I don't go home and I'm not like
insecure or I'm not unconfident like I'm
I think like when I'm on my own I'm very
very okay with Who I Am with myself I'm
very very like I feel like the guy that
you experience on camera is very close
to who I am when I'm in the hotel room
alone at night however it doesn't mean
that I still don't have those like
childhood bruises and that they can't be
pressed by various things and so it's
this sort of this s because you know
when we say these words like insecurity
and shame you think you'd think that
like I walk into the The Green Room over
there and I'm like oh that's not it's
not my life but when I where I know that
there's still something there is I go
how that why are you still driving like
this exactly when you are so well aware
that it will not lead to any more
happiness in any in any context like I'm
so logically aware
that becoming more will not have any
impact on the things that matter yet
here I am still building businesses and
you know and this is the constant thing
I I battle with so I go okay well there
must be a force that you're consciously
unaware of that's making you go go on
and go on exactly yeah right so let's
understand a couple things beautiful
beautiful beautiful Stephen beautiful so
a couple of things to understand we
think about healing as a as one Spectrum
right so if I'm at negative 100 I can't
also be at positive 100 those two things
cancel out that's not how it works so if
I give you a glass of water and then I
piss in it and then I add sugar it
doesn't remove the piss these are both
independent things this is what tends to
happen this is what we don't understand
about trauma you removing the piss
requires removing the piss no amount of
sugar will take it out of the drink okay
so no amount of this is mistake number
one no amount of building something good
will remove something bad
okay so healing and it's also like you
know if I break a leg no amount of bench
press will heal my leg like I can build
as much as I want to I can fix my hair I
can brush my teeth but the Le is broken
the leg is broken same is true of the
mind okay second thing is what happens
is we have like our Consciousness is
divided now we're going to get kind of
Technical and off the rails so we have
all of these like dormant pieces of our
Consciousness that activate in certain
situations and all you have to do is pay
attention to yourself in a 5minute
period and you'll see this so when I
walk into a bathroom that I've never
used
before then I start thinking about okay
where's the flush where's the toilet how
do I use this toilet you know so like
I'll activate dormant information all
the time so if someone asks me what's
you know the quadratic equation that
information is there and dormant in my
mind and it gets activated so one of the
biggest mistakes we make about healing
is we look at what is active in our mind
90% of the time and we assume that the
injury is no longer there that's not the
case does that make sense 100% right so
the the injury just goes dormant then
there are certain things that happen
that can trigger that injury that's what
we call triggers right so if I'm
traumatized if we look at like PTSD and
I'm I've been traumatized by you know a
a bomb going off literally my brain has
certain circuits that scans my
perceptual environment and decides what
to activate so there are ways Stillness
makes you feel small and [__] you if
you're ever going to be small again
never again never again never again I
would bet money that if you sit by
yourself and you're not occupied right
that's why you have to watch crime shows
because if you don't watch crime shows
you're going to be still and if you're
still that's
unacceptable okay so dormant things have
to be healed where they belong you don't
need to worry by the way it's in your
karma it's going to get healed and it's
coming yeah I was laughing cuz it's so
true yeah just laughing at the fact that
I when I go to Bary I end up that's like
where I end up writing a book and I'm
like and and people would kill for that
right so many people out there are like
oh man I would love to be you no you
guys don't want to be stepen I know you
think you do this is the crazy thing we
each as human beings have our own
journey and are you privileged and
should you be grateful and should people
aspire to be you absolutely but they
don't want to be you like your own
problems are enough they don't need
yours too amen so now the question is
how do we heal so I think the problem is
like no amount of fixing things over
there is going to go back to this and
this is where I we can look at the
science of of of healing trauma so here
are the steps first thing is safety so
that we can get neuroplasticity second
thing is emotional awareness and
emotional regulation and this allows us
for number three which is really
important which is identity so if we
look at our human sense of identity how
do you develop an identity so if I were
to ask you in three senten is Steven who
are
you my identity yeah tell me who who's
stepen to myself or just to the world or
is that the same tell me about who's
Stephen I I'm an entrepreneur I am
a I guess I'm a podcaster now
um and I
am going to say a Manchester United fan
okay so I think those are three features
right so I've I've read your bio so the
other thing that you tend to do in your
bio is there's a narrative right you
were a College Dropout yeah um you
started a company yeah right you talked
about this Louis Vuitton bag phase and
then there's the post Louis Vuitton bag
phase yeah and even before we had this
podcast you were talking to me about the
phases of your life yeah so identity re
requires a timeline okay now the
interesting thing is if we look at the
formative moments of your life they all
have
emotion so this is what's really
important if you have an identity
that is bad in any way you can never
change that identity without
emotions so what what happen so my like
when I tell my story it's like I was a
kid 9 years old I got put on these
expectations dropped out of college went
to become a monk went to medical school
became a doctor now I started this whole
helping random people on the internet
thing so each of those were emotional
experiences so who we are is a narrative
of our most emotional experiences and we
see this in all of our like superhero
movies right Batman had this tragic
experience where his parents were shot
by The Joker and then he became
something right there all all these
moments these powerful emotional moments
so if your emotions are dulled by drugs
by technology by pornography by watching
serial killer shows you will never
change who you are it is impossible the
Neuroscience of your identity
development requires emotional
experience okay so with trauma that's
the next thing that happens once we have
access to emotions then we can become
someone
else now the problem with trauma is that
before we become someone else the
beliefs we have about
ourselves become our destiny so if I
think to myself I'm a loser so I I when
I was interviewing for
residency I went to an interview
somewhere on the west coast and the
director of the program called me and at
the end of the interview and they're
like we don't understand why you're here
and I was like what do you mean you
don't understand why I'm here and
they're like your application is really
good you could end up at any program in
the country like why did you pick us and
like I was like I picked y'all because I
liked the way that your hospital works
and I like that the city it's in and I'm
super into compliment all like what what
do you mean why am I here right but the
way that he approached it with a lack of
confidence he's like our program sucks
and they had some problems at the
program at the time so kind of makes
sense but this becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy if I go into a job interview
and I feel a lack of confidence if I
believe I'm a loser then I'm not going
to get the job you used to go to clubs
and buy bottles of Champagnes and
thought that you were a loser didn't end
up where you wanted to go so this is
what a lot of people don't understand
everyone's focused on productivity but
the single most important thing that
will determine your future is your sense
of who you are and that's not like some
oh spiritual get connected with this is
like [__] science right if you
believe you are a loser the empathic CS
of other people's brains will detect
that in you and they will treat you like
a loser you carry who you are with you
that's why you get into failed
relationship number one failed
relationship number two failed
relationship number three until you
changed and when you change your sense
of identity changes then your future
will change the last thing to do is on a
more microscopic level look at these
responses within yourself so you asked
me at the very beginning of the podcast
and now we're coming full circle how do
you start understanding yourself so you
look at the drives within yourself right
why can't I sit still and this is going
to be so hard for you because if I told
you this is hilarious if I told you
Stephen if you want to heal your trauma
you need to go to ball you need to sit
on a beach and you need to do nothing
you will still turn that into growth and
progress because what you'll say is oh
this is what Dr K told me to heal my
trauma so now I'm doing even more
important work than a podcast for 10
million people on the internet now I'm
doing the healing of my trauma which is
the goal and you're still running away
from yourself there's no way you can run
away from it your mind will transform
the very thing that you do into the
problem and that's what trauma
does I'll give you a chance to respond
because I've been I'm waiting for the
solution Dr K yeah so I mean I in your
case I I think it's like sit just sit
and you have to be careful because if
your mind turns the sitting into a goal
that I have to achieve oh I need to sit
and that will be my growth no no [__]
goal just sit waste your time what you
need to learn how to do is waste your
time do nothing sit be with yourself and
watch out for that mind the second thing
is awareness okay so as you sit you will
notice all of these things come up so
this is like you wanted to you asked me
a question at the beginning how do you
start so what I would say is sit for 5
minutes 15 minutes sometimes we'll tell
people to stare at a wall for an
hour and just look at what on Earth goes
on inside you you will discover that it
is a zoo of thoughts feelings emotions
drives panics worries distractions your
internal environment is such a mess so
what we need to do is just kind of calm
that stuff down by like just letting it
kind of run out of steam so this this is
a principle of the mind that if we in if
we feed our mind it'll continue to grow
but like what we need to do is just let
it run out of steam so just sit and do
nothing for a while people don't
realize the part of our brain that
exerts willpower has something to do
with this part of our brain called the
anterior singulate cortex the anterior
singulate cortex is a piece of where
willpower comes from but it is also the
part of our brain that monitors
conflict so will hour and monitoring a
conflict are actually technically the
same thing the same part of the brain
activates and if you guys if you pay
attention to your own internal
experience what you'll realize is
anytime you're using willpower there's
an internal struggle that you are paying
attention to it's like I don't want to
order chicken I want to order Fried
Chicken so there's a monitoring of the
conflict that goes on that's anytime
you're exerting willpower there's this
thing this way and this thing this way
but you are aware of it you can't exert
willpower if you're behaving
automatically right that's why it's so
easy to get lost in Doom scrolling
because you're not even aware of what
you're doing before and then four hours
have gone by and you're like what what
happened you're not aware so this is the
crazy thing from a neuroscientific
perspective and this is what the yogis
will teach as well awareness is
willpower awareness is self-control and
I've worked with tons of addicts they
come up for air and maybe you've done
this and maybe people at home have done
this you go on this binge and then you
come up for air and you're like what
have I been doing for a couple of days
what I've been doing for a couple of
hours then you gain that awareness again
so the more that you are aware in the
present moment the more your problems
will literally melt away it's like crazy
I don't quite know how it works but this
is what yoga teaches you that as you
were aware as you were aware as you were
aware you stop rejecting things you
start accepting things you focus on the
present all the stuff that everyone
talks about is actually rooted in
awareness and we live in a society where
I say if I say you don't need habits you
don't need willpower you don't need
discipline all you need is awareness
people will reject me that doesn't mean
it isn't true and the more that you
explore awareness the more you will
realize like I used to think it was like
50/50 I'm now at like 90% of the problem
is
awareness I know it's weird no but does
that because we tend to look
for solutions that involve
action like you know buy that thing make
that list go to that meeting watch that
thing it's all about action action
action as a solution to our problems so
I was expecting you to tell me that the
solution to everything we've discussed
here is like the seven-step process of
like write this thing down say this
thing and you know okay so let's let's
understand this okay you work really
hard
Stephen is it hard to work
hard for me yeah no okay so now we have
to understand why is it not hard for you
to work
hard it's why is it not hard for me to
work hard because it feels good to work
hard absolutely so your problem see this
is the whole problem that everyone makes
so Stephen you started a company
when uh first one was very young but we
won't count that because I didn't
register the company so the first one
that was registered would have been when
I was 18 okay and you've started how
many companies or been involved in how
many companies 10 10 20 yeah and made
like millions and millions of dollars
and stuff yeah right started a podcast
you've got how many millions of
subscribers now um across the platforms
maybe 10 million okay cool right so like
this is a lot of work and everyone's
like oh my God I want to be like Stephen
but the whole thing is it's not hard for
you it's hard for you to not do it
so this is what I'm saying you don't
need to focus on the action it's the
internal thing that drives you like a
[__]
slave that is responsible for your
success if someone else wants a fraction
of what you have 10% of what you have
they don't need to duplicate your
actions they need to duplicate what's
going on on the inside this is exactly
my point they need your toxic
fuel yeah toxic fuel is on the path to
happiness
right can be yeah I
mean cuz you're doing pretty well do you
know what though I this is maybe I don't
know how this throws a spanner in the
works of this but I've never felt
unhappy and and I've always struggled
when I I say used to say to people and
because time is past now it's sometimes
hard to know how you felt in the past
but I say to people that when I was 18
years old and I had just dropped out a
university and I was starting this first
business and my parents W speaking to me
I was poor and all these things I was
shoplifting food I was as happy then as
I am now and like when I say that to
people I know it sounds like like
motivational [__] or something but
in that moment I had Forward Motion I
was excited about life I thought that I
was all everything that in my objective
reality was just the stepping stone to
becoming and I so I was so excited I was
so happy about life and I feel the same
now yeah so despite everything we've
discussed
um I feel happy when I'm alone I'm happy
yeah and I and you know that's um yeah
great so so I think that makes a lot of
sense or bullshitting but I no no you're
not [__] I think I'm double guessing
myself no you're not bullshitting so
let's understand the subtlety here so
the stages of unhappiness to happiness
there's unhappy in all situations
unhappy in some situations happy in some
situations happy in most situations and
then MOA Enlightenment MTI is happiness
in all situations happiness that is
completely independent of your
circumstances that's the stage that
you're at because we can make you
unhappy very very easily yeah that's
true right yeah so so and it kind of
makes sense this is what happens is we
start to craft a life that makes us
happy that's the first step totally good
but then what happens is that we are
still dependent on the external life for
our happiness and that will never work
100% so what's this MTA you mentioned is
Moka Enlightenment Nirvana All same
thing how do we get
that uh how do you get there or someone
else are you there no how how do I get
there how does anyone get there
you sit by yourself and don't do
anything for how
long no can't ask that
question so the moment that you ask that
question there's a goal there's a future
Dimension there's an objective you have
to exist without an objective and
that'll move you in the right
direction just be for no reason for no
purpose recognize that all of this stuff
this is going to get kind of weird no
matter what you do in the world you're
still existing right so you just need
you need to remove all of the stuff and
just
exist that's what Moka is pure
existence without attachment without
feeling without thought without goal
just being and the crazy thing is we're
all doing this all the time we're all
existing all the
time I hear this loud voice from all the
high performing individuals that listen
to my show shouting and it's also coming
from my brain as well which is Dr K if I
take this advice and if I just sit how
am I going to pay the bills and won't
that cost me my motivation and if it
cost me my motivation then it will cost
me my my purpose this art business I've
started this cupcake shop I'm running
that's giving me so much excitement in
my life when I lose my motivation if I
just sit yes and no so the first thing
we have to understand is yes so someone
who's enlightened is not compatible with
a regular life in some ways so let's
understand that like that's what
happened to Buddha he was a king he was
married he had a kid was loved was
powerful and was like I'm done is that
Buddha how we pronounce it incorrectly
Buddha Buddha same thing okay yeah goam
Buddha
right so in a sense it is incompatible
with life the second thing is that once
see you have a motivation right but once
you exist in the world and you are just
being without anything you'll still act
in fact acting will become even easier
and that's hard to understand because we
are so used to toxic fuel that we it's
kind of
like so if you have kids one day you'll
understand this I can the best I can do
is an analogy
so when a kid comes up to
you and is crying because oh like my you
know my doll has has gotten wet okay and
the kid comes up to you there's no like
goal that you have in your life and
you're not like trying to be a good dad
like you're I don't know if that makes
sense like when a kid when your kid
walks up to you and they're upset about
something that's irrelevant you just act
in response to what is necessary in the
moment you don't get upset you're not
worried about their growth you're not
worried about traumatizing you just
respond does that kind of make sense
yeah and so the other thing is like if
I'm walking down the street and someone
is carrying groceries and I hold the
door open for them I just respond to the
environment so what actually happens the
closer you get to this state is you can
absolutely be productive so what I found
is that the closer I get to the state
the more productive I am but now what
I'm doing is just responding to the
environment around me I'm not driving
anywhere I'm not going anywhere I'm just
responding and that beautiful it's
liberating there's no goal there's no
falling short of there's no achievement
there's just I'm going to do what needs
to be done in the moment if I'm sitting
in the emergency room and I'm on call
and a patient walks in the door I'm
going to take care of the patient if
they don't walk in the door I'm going to
do something else how is that different
to reacting because reacting sounds a
little bit more emotional whereas you're
saying respond it sounds like emotion
has been removed from the situation to
some degree uh so in a sense it is Rea
I'm responding to the situation but
often times when we react emotionally we
are carrying something with us from the
past into the present moment that will
cause you all kinds of problems right so
if I have infidelity I worked with a
patient who had a problem with
infidelity and their partner and then
when they're dating the next person
their fears of infidelity from the past
be come into the present and then they
react to the situation they don't
actually perfectly respond to the
situation they color the situation with
their baggage that's not clean
responding so like when I am on call and
my friend tells me the night before oh
yeah we had zero patients I slept all
night and then a patient walks in the
door and I think to myself why am I so
unlucky the majority or even arguably
all of our unhappiness in life is
because of what we carry with
us so how do we get to that place where
we just
respond so I think it's like we have to
heal that inner child and all that kind
of stuff we have to remove all of our
past from our mind and then we have to
remove all of the future from our mind
we have to strive for nothing and just
be what you are just be it's like kind
of hard to understand but you just got
to do it there's not like more
methodology is not going to
work that's what's so confusing about it
is like you're I'm you're keep on asking
me questions I've already given you the
answer you just don't like it no no no
no because yeah I'm just uh sometimes
it's good to hear yeah the same thing
again but also also because I know I'm
asking these questions in part because I
know it's obviously The Logical question
that anyone who just heard you say this
Revelation about responding is going to
go how yeah so so so what I would say is
just sit down yeah and pay attention to
yourself that's it that's it I mean you
can do all the stuff we've given you
lots of techniques over the course of
the last couple hours but like at the
end of the day just sit down and explore
yourself be with yourself impulses come
up and then ask yourself so in a
practical sense you're going to have
drivers towards things and ask yourself
why do I feel this way why do I need to
do this why is this easy for me and why
is this hard for me and the more that
you explore that the more you will
understand and then the more neutral you
will become and when you're fully
neutral then let me put it to you this
way so if you don't care about what you
eat it's not like there's no suffering
and whatever you get you'll be happy
with right so it's like our caring that
causes the problem so we need to move
towards this neutrality and then actions
become easy
because if I don't care if I'm not
attached to something then I can study
or I can play a video game makes no
difference to me oh do you want to watch
a comedy or a horror movie makes no
difference to me then life becomes fun
you can just enjoy everything and
there's nothing to worry about and I
think it starts with just being with
yourself and understanding where your
internal drivers come from because we
don't get to choose the person that we
become our brain makes adaptations every
single day you don't get to edit what
you learn does that make sense yeah yeah
so our problem in life is that we have
all these learnings we have this
instrument this this thing that has been
cobbled together after some crappy
experience and another crappy experience
and some positive experience and you
have this internal schema of how to live
the world but it wasn't crafted with any
intentionality so the first step is to
be aware of like what is this road map
looking like what is the blueprint and
the more that you understand this stuff
the easier it will
become would you recommend starting your
day with a little gap for this 100%
awareness practice I think it's
brilliant my partner does that she
spends the first sort of 20 minutes of
the morning she just goes and sits in a
room by herself and does nothing and I
just look at her and go what a
psychopath yeah right so beginning of
your day or end of your day
sunset uh
sunrise and you can do a meditative
practice meditative practices will get
you here too sometimes that's actually
easier because it gives your mind some
kind of goal to move towards I'm going
to try this okay I'm going to try this
and I'm going to text you and let you
know how I get on I'm going to try in
the mornings when I wake up to just stay
away from all devices and just
sit and I'll let you know how I get on
and I'll be honest with you yeah be
honest with you I will be and even if I
can't do it I'll be honest with you yeah
and that's okay so the one thing I would
ask is that if you let me know how it
goes may not go
well you got to give me a chance to give
you a second thing to do okay why why'
you say that
because I think we're asking too much of
you okay you think I'm going to fail be
honest yes I think you're going to fail
but I think the problem is that if I
tell you you're going to fail you're
going to try to succeed and we make a
goal out of it so we've already failed
like so so it's it's so just give me a
second chance I'll figure I'll we'll
trick you have we have to trick you into
doing it we can't let you know that
we're doing
it reminds me of what you were saying
about your your wife giving birth before
we started recording about lay on your
left the kid likes it yeah so the mind
is so tricky right so the mind will
craft a goal for you out of this and if
I tell you Steven you will fail I'm not
trying to manipulate I'm worried that if
I tell you you're going to fail you're
going to do
it it's so interesting what my mind did
there as well and it's just and this is
so icky but I'm going to be honest
because it just what's the point this is
called the dire of a CE so um even when
I thought about doing that like I was
like okay so sit in the morning spend 20
minutes um just being and then do that
try and do that Steve like a week or two
weeks and then you can come back on the
podcast and tell people about it I'm
like that's [__] you just made this
about an external thing again good
brilliant brilliant brilliant brilliant
you know why what's brilliant about that
awareness exactly yeah change is
happening change cannot happen while
you're blind you cannot good diagnosis
predes good treatment so this is the
other thing really interesting right so
one last thing I know we're running long
so this is a habit for you right yeah
for a habit to be this is a very simple
technique to demolish any
habit a habit is automatic that's what
makes it a habit that's why we love
habits why is everyone so obsessed with
habits because if it's a habit then it
happens automatically if it's a habit I
don't have to work hard I want to
program myself so I can be
lazy so all you need to do to demolish a
habit is awareness because literally the
circuits involved in your brain are
completely different The Habit circuitry
in your brain is the endoc canabo system
awareness of the present moment is your
anterior singulate cortex in your
frontal loopes you cannot have a habit
and exert willpower at the same time
that's the whole point of a habit so as
you become aware every time you catch it
Stephen it will chip away at it it'll
get cut away 1% 1% 1% until it
disappears catch it as many times as you
can is this why it's useful to keep a
diary or to write sort of it can it can
be Diaries have all kinds of other
mechanisms so the just a couple of quick
ones so one is that Diaries slow down
the pace of your thinking because when
you write you write slower than you
think so you me like meditate on the
thoughts a little bit more the second
thing is that a when we think in our
head we're using some circuits of the
brain but when we write we are
activating our sensory
inputs and our capacity to learn from
our sensory inputs versus thinking is
actually way
higher right yeah so it's like
activating a completely different part
of the brain we're slowing down our
thoughts so slowing down thought and
activating our sens sensory inputs is
part of why a diary is useful the other
thing the other third thing with a diary
being useful is that when we think in
our mind we end up in a different place
from when we
write so it's a lot easier in our mind
to end up with habitual patterns of
thinking in a diary it's way harder to
end up with habitual thinking so you
will explore yourself more effectively
using a diary when I look at the first
pages of my diary I find a guy that's
constantly and this is really where the
Diary of AO came to be the start of the
podcast was me sharing my diary the
things I'd written in my diary every day
um some of those early episodes that I
made were about the subject of purpose
which is something I've heard you speak
a lot about and that's kind of where I
wanted to end our conversation today is
so many people and I know this from the
comments and DMs I get are struggling to
find their purpose now even as I say
that I go I've loaded the question
because I've said find which which
insinuates there some kind of search and
purpose is a singular word so it
indicates that there's one but you know
what I'm saying what is that that people
are looking for and why are they
struggling to find it this is very
simple you can look at any human being
on the planet and you can see that they
all gravitate towards something which is
internal peace
so our hunger gives us a sense when we
eat then we have internal peace thirst
gives us a sense of wanting to drink and
then we have internal peace when we want
self-respect the feeling of a lack of
self-respect is a lack of internal peace
so this is what's kind of weird is that
all of these we're chasing all of these
things outside of us to create an
internal state right so no matter what
you do in life at some point your
actions are going to cross the barrier
of the external to the internal and will
make you feel a certain way why do we
get married to create a particular
feeling why do we give someone a kiss to
create a particular feeling right so
everything we experience within us now
why is it so hard for people so we're
all looking for inner peace that's just
it period right and then the question
becomes what makes it hard very simple
because we're looking for it in the
wrong place so we're all looking for it
outside of
us right so we're looking and then what
happens is if we look for inner peace
from the outside so if I get Inner Peace
because people tell me Al look you're so
great now what happens is that peace
lasts only as long as people are saying
it and the real reason we're screwed is
because the biological organism develops
a system of tolerance so right now
you've got 10 million followers and then
you're going to need more and then
you're going to need more we're going to
need more intense pornography we're
going to need more intense video games
we're going to need more exciting TV
shows so the nature of the human
organism is to adapt to its surroundings
which is why you will never succeed if
you are relying on the outside world to
make you happy because you will just
want more and more and more and what
helps you achieve happiness comes from
in here that's why it's so hard for
everyone so these kids asking saying
that they can't find their purpose
they're in jobs they they don't like or
they're you know embarking on their
professional Journeys and they don't
know what their purpose is what is it
you say to them when they DM
you um so I I think uh one thing I would
say to them is purpose is an attitude
it's not a
thing right so like it take any action
what makes that action align with your
purpose it's the attitude that you take
towards
it so if I give you this meditation
practice to sit and do nothing you're
like yeah it's part of my purpose and
part of my growth you see what I mean
like it's all about the way that your
mind a purpose is not purpose is an
attitude it's not like a
goal so I'll even do this like so when I
was in in you know in residency like
sometimes I would have students who were
struggling right and like since I'm a
nice guy people would come to me and
they're like hey I'm struggling like I
don't want to learn this stuff and and
what we really do is we shift their
purpose by shifting their attitude
they're like I'm not interested in
Psychiatry I'm like fair enough so
here's the thing you got to understand
for the rest of your life no matter what
kind of medicine you practice you're
going to get people people who are
mentally ill and or addicted to things
who are going to be personality
disordered I can guarantee you that the
worst days of your life will have
nothing to do with surgery they're going
to have to do with having a personality
disordered sociopathic narcissistic
borderline personality disorder patient
who is making a mess on the floor nurses
are going to be paging you no one is
going to want to talk to them this is
vitally important for you to learn no
matter what you're interested in so it's
about the attitude the other thing that
I'll do with students is they're like so
worried about getting honors they're
like oh I got to get a good grade I got
this is Harvard right so these are like
really gunning medical students and I
was like you guys are missing the point
you're not here to get honors you're
here to practice medicine so one day
you're going to be on an airplane and
you're going to hear the flight
attendant pick up the phone they're
going to be like is there a doctor on
the
plane and then you don't get to say oh
sorry I it's not something I'm
interested in I just got a pass I can't
you don't get to say that you're here to
learn how to save life
lives right and so that attitude when it
sinks in with them changes the way that
they learn I don't care what your gr is
it's not about the grade it's about like
we're trying to teach you medicine
because you're going to need it one day
a lot of people have seemingly found
their purpose but then they get a little
bit of a quto lifee crisis and I've
never really heard this term quto life
crisis before until you started speaking
about it what is a quarter life crisis
and what is actually going on there so a
quarter life crisis is something that
we're seeing like more and more of so
usually what happens is that see early
on you asked earlier if if we have you
know dreams right so I have a dream of
something but I don't really know what
it is so I'm 15 years old I pick a dream
I start advancing towards it and our our
when we form our life what we try to do
is we we develop a conception and then
we live up to that conception so I'm
going to be a doctor one day and then
the reality of our the reality is very
different from our dreams so then what
happens is we tend to find ourselves in
a place that we're like not happy with
so I see this a lot from like people who
are like oh I want to be like a
programmer but then they're working in
this environment where there's like you
know there's always like scope creep
there's like burn like the Sprints are
very exhausting it's burned out like I'm
not happy here so the first stage of a
quarter life crisis is feeling trapped
now you've invested all of this time and
energy into like you know medicine or
being a doctor and you spent years or
like being a programmer now you're
trapped in this situation because you've
invested so much time the second thing
that happens in a quarter life crisis so
people are like this is what it it
sounds like so I wake up every day I
pack my lunch I drive in traffic I'm at
my job where I'm underappreciated I'm
not challenged I drive home I'm supposed
to take care of myself so I'm going to
listen to step's podcast on the way home
I'm going to work out I'm going to do
laundry I'm going to eat a couple of
chicken breasts and then it's time for
sleep and you do this for about two
years and you're like is this life what
else can I do so it starts with a
feeling of being trapped second thing
that happens is people mentally check
out so you'll feel like I don't I'm not
passionate about my
job now this is where people make a big
mistake because if you look at the
research on quarter life crisis what
they will try to do is check back in
they'll try to cultivate some sense of
Joy or like how do I get engaged in life
but this is what's really interesting is
mentally checking out is an important
developmental step to growth so if you
don't check out of your existing job or
your existing relationship there's no
space in your mind for a new one so we
have to mentally check out it's actually
part of the process then this is where
things get really interesting if we look
at the successful navigation of a
quarter life crisis we all feel trapped
then we check out we think this is a bad
thing then what gets really interesting
is that there's usually some kind of
intentional moving away so in my case I
literally like went to India so we know
that that human beings need to create
some amount of psychological or physical
space I've had patients who have joined
the military I've had patients who have
like driven cross country you need space
like physical space and mental space
away from what you're checked out from
then we get to something that's really
interesting so you asked this question
how do you find purpose purpose is not
something you find it's not like you're
walking down the street and like oh or
you're meditating and it's like ah I
have purpose purpose is crafted right so
once we're mentally we mentally check
out that allows us to distance ourselves
because if we don't mentally check out
and we step away we're going to feel
guilt we're going to feel like you know
we have to check out we have to give up
on it otherwise we'll stay stuck does
that kind of make sense so then what we
have to do is a period of
self-exploration and craftsmanship so
then what we do is like discover okay
who am I what do I really want we we
connect with our internal selves so this
is really important about a quarter life
crisis the first phase of our life we
are living up to external expectations
and it's not really about what I want I
think I want to become a doctor but what
do I really know I'm not really
listening to myself I'm just being
programmed by my conditioning so we
start out being very externally focused
then we feel trapped then we check out
then we move away then we discover who
we discover you don't discover it's not
there you craft who you are you get in
touch with yourself
and then comes the last phase of the
quarter life crisis which is that you
craft an external
world based on your internal environment
so now your compass is dictating what
you do you find a relationship that
resonates with you to begin with and so
in my case and your case probably we
probably did this in some way we failed
we did something new and then we like
figured out okay this is what excites me
right so at some point growth excites
you you so now like this endeavor is
about growth it's about helping people
so now you're crafting your external
life based on what you've discovered
about yourself internally and that's
kind of the last
phase the problem that people run into
is that they don't realize that this
sequence is necessary and you have to do
it in this order yeah I was thinking
about so many of my friends as you
described this process that have come to
me for advice recently um these are
friends who have quit their business so
they've sold their company yeah and then
they've taken you know two months off
they've got so agitated and in two cases
that I can describe a very big companies
everyone listening would know that
friend has gone back to the business
absolutely so I mean I've had I can
think of two people as well who you know
one one person you know sold a company
at 29 for ton of money and then they
were like tried to find themselves for a
year or two and then went back to
starting companies yeah right but but my
friends actually went back into the same
company I've seen that too like bought
the company back or went back in as CEO
yeah I've seen someone bought a company
didn't manage it properly value declined
and then you buy it back you're net
positive and then you run it and it goes
well my mentor said to me when I left my
first business which um is what made
gave me sort of Financial Freedom he
said to me when I called him it was in
the middle of the pandemic and I said
I've sold the company now and I'm I'm
out and I'm sold my shares over the
market in a private transaction and it's
the pandemic like the world has stopped
and you know what I'm like so I'm like
well what do I do now and he said to me
it's my friend Shaq Shaquille Khan he
said the hardest thing in the world for
you to do and the most important thing
for you to do is to do nothing and he
was like you just need to sit and you
need to do nothing he goes because
you're going to get all these urges
Steve to go back and start a similar
business the same business um because
you can and you know you can but he goes
the reason why you are successful the
first time around is now kind of expired
like you did that so the thing that's
going to drive you every day and give
that sense of like feel motivation and
purpose is going to be something else
and you're going to need to create a
space for it to emerge and I say that to
Founders all the time that like exit
their businesses or leave their
companies is you have to basically do
this painful process of like sitting on
your hands for like a year and being
patient and waiting yeah and that's kind
of what you were saying you're saying
about cultivating this um this new life
but from inside out not from outside in
because you get so many offers you get
so many opportunities and offers in that
space um but those again aren't yours
you didn't cultivate them they just came
to you so yeah it's such a beautiful way
to put it like living your life from the
inside out as opposed to the outside in
and and that's that's like that's what
people should
do that's what you help people do and
that's what you've helped me do every
time we spoke and every time we speak
it's it's on one hand it's so
informative and so um wise and so unique
because you're combining disciplines and
you're doing it in such a wonderfully
smooth fluent and
logical way my brain is struggles when
anything gets a little bit too fluffy or
like Airy fairy but as you speak you
weave these worlds together in such a
wonderful way and at the other end it's
really confronting and I am someone that
likes the confrontation because you know
I gives you an opportunity to
grow no because I just I what like what
an absolute honor that I get to sit with
someone like you who's like super smart
and gone to Har and all these things and
I get to work through some of the the
things that that I struggle with but
also I also realize as um a podcaster
that it's the most the most value that I
think I can give to the audience is like
me being honest about myself yeah that
is the information that is in greatest
demand but in least Supply in the world
is people doing what we just did I you
know what I mean does that make sense I
I it's it's a a brilliant I mean I just
I love the way that you put thoughts
together right so I I think that's
correct so I I think if we look at the
success of this podcast your
authenticity is such a huge part of it
and also what's happening is we're
getting so much like derivative content
we're getting like five tips for this
and five tips for that and 10 techniques
to do this and and what what's missing
is like authenticity I've thought about
this so much man it's like how do you
ask obviously my job is to ask questions
right and the longer I've done this
podcast what I've come to realizes the
best questions are the ones that no one
could give me that are like deep in my
heart somewhere that I've would maybe
been too scared to like to say out loud
and when I get closer to those questions
the conversations are so much more
valuable for the audience and I can rank
the conversations essentially based on
how much the questions came from my soul
and then the like metric that I I might
measure um it based on is the amount of
people that message me and the length of
the message they send because if I ask
questions from my soul the messages that
they send me get exponentially longer it
it becomes like they send me
pages when you know these are my
questions if I make a conversation about
the gut microbiome people might say hey
I love that podcast but gut micro biome
I'm meeting leafy veg now but when they
come from my soul yeah it's like the
world gives me that back if you know
what I mean absolutely and I I I think
that's that's what that's why I really
love doing this it's a privilege for me
too and I think like this is a very
common issue and I think we've been kind
of skirting not skirting around we've
touched on this issue several times but
you've asked me what do we do right what
is what is the answer I think the one
thing I've learned for 10 years of being
a medical doctor
is it's not about finding the right
answers it's about asking the right
questions that is the methodology
because an answer is outside of you it
theoretically applies to all people but
if you really want to be your best self
that answer needs to be tailored to you
specifically to you and that answer what
works for you only you know right right
I don't know what's going to work for
you or anyone else because I don't have
information about your internal
environment MH so the real key is not
about finding the right answers it's
about asking the right questions so that
you can get the data within that applies
to you 100% why do we have so much
advice on the internet because none of
it applies 100% to your unique genetics
your unique epigenetics your experiences
your traumas your dormant unconscious
so that's what you need to do is is
develop a plan that is only going to
work for you and that's not about an
answer it's about a methodology how do
you think I could be a better podcaster
and I guess we have to Define what
better means but how do you think that I
could I don't think you can be a better
podcaster and I think you should stop
trying okay I think you should do
exactly what you are doing and recognize
that you you are enough so just keep
doing what you're doing you shouldn't
try to be better this is all a part of
your journey mhm I I don't think you no
I don't accept the question I don't
think you can be better I think the
concept of better is literally
hypothetical does that make sense makes
perfect sense you just are so just be
yeah it's funny because the the more in
my life that I've just
been um the better everything has got
and including my romantic relationship
with my partner it's just it's there's a
real correlation between just being
and I don't know seemingly things just
figuring themselves out it's kind of
goes back to what I was saying about
like the Louis Vuitton of my life and
then they're like post l t around I had
better results when I was just being so
exactly and this podcast was based on
that it was based on me just being um
which was scary it was really scary at
the start it was scary just talking
about these things publicly at the start
you
know Dr K we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next and the question
that's been left for you
is what is your rich
life I guess the one that I've
got I mean that you know what it doesn't
matter what the adjective is the the
only life I have is the one that I've
got so what is my rich life what is my
poor life what is my good life what is
my bad life it's the one that I have and
and I'll kind of leave with like one
last thought so I saw something really
interesting in a study about aging so
you know there's all this loneliness
epidemic going on so it's really
interesting because if you look at
it scientifically
logically as we get older our life gets
objectively
worse so we lose friends so literally
over time the number of friends you have
as you get older like they literally
start dying um we lose relationships our
physical body starts to break down so
like our life objectively by certain
measures gets worse so what's really
interesting is that you'd expect old
people are like more depressed because
their life is objectively worse
and sometimes they are but there's one
variable that correlates with being
content in life versus being unhappy in
life and that is how okay you are with a
Bittersweet life so the more engaged
with this concept of something being
Bittersweet you are as you get older the
more content you will be so I think my
answer to that question is like
embracing the bittersweetness of life
like there's piss in there and there's
sugar
and that's just what it is thank you so
much Dr K I really appreciate it you're
a very special human being and um I feel
indebted to you because you you know I
wish I could speak to you every day but
this is why people need to go read your
books and follow your YouTube channel
because uh in that regard we can um and
I hope to have many more conversations
with you about all of these things as I
continue on my journey towards I don't
know where the [__] I'm going but but
thank you so much you're a really really
special human being it's been an honor
to be here and an absolute pleasure
thank you so much Stephen
[Music]
every single time you eat you have an
opportunity to improve your health and
that's why I love Zoe because Zoe helps
me to make the smartest food choices for
me and my body and as you guys will know
by now Zoe is a sponsor of this podcast
and I'm an investor in the company and
if you haven't tried Zoe I highly
recommend you do because Zoe combines My
Health Data with Zoe's worldclass
science
and using those two things Zoe guides me
to Better Health every single time I
make a food choice and eat which means
that I have more energy better sleep
better mood and I'm less hungry and the
most important thing is Zoe actually
works it's backed by their recent
clinical trial something called the
method study which is the gold standard
of scientific research I started Zoe
just over a year ago now and I've been
able to track my progress week after
week so I can learn how to be even
smarter the following week and if you
haven't joined Zoe yet I'm giving you
10% off when you join Zoe now just use
the code ce10 at checkout isn't this
cool every single conversation I have
here on the Diary of a CEO at the very
end of it you'll know I asked the guest
to leave a question in the Diary of a
CEO and what we've done is we've turned
every single question written in the
Diary of a CEO into these conversation
cards that you can play at home so
you've got every guest we've ever had
their question and on the back of it if
you scan that QR code you get to watch
the person who answered that question
we're finally revealing all of the
questions and the people that answered
the question the brand new version 2
updated conversation cards are out right
now at Theon conversation cards.com
they've sold out twice instantaneously
so if you are interested in getting hold
of some limited edition conversation
cards I really really recommend acting
quickly ah
[Music]